---
title: "October 2025 Review"
date: 2025-11-03T09:20:59Z
authors: 
- "Matthew Lamont"
draft: false
tags:
  - Monthly Favorites
  - Monthly Review
slug: /october-review/
keywords:
  - Review
description: It was a rough month, lets review some links and my thoughts.
---

I started this month with the goal of making something/doing something creative every day, but with a literal authoritarian government taking over the US and general life stuff taking my mental energy, I was not nearly as productive as I would have hoped.

I did do a little work on my RPG Maker game, wrote a blog post, have two other draft blog posts, and took lost of photos that I need to go through. It was a rough month personally and work was busy.

My parents did drop off my two youngest siblings for a day so my girlfriend and I could take them to the LA Natural History Museum and Little Tokyo. That was a lot of fun. Not going to upload pictures as a lot of them have the kids in them.

I also started re-reading Berserk. I originally got to vol 39 before I stopped reading, but now the whole series is published in English in lovely hard cover versions. Only 4 vols in due to life and the whole lack of mental energy thing, but the idea was originally to complete the series in October. Maybe November will be better.

## US News

There is no world in witch you could convince me that Trump and his goons are not authoritarian thugs. Not saying all Republicans are authoritarian, but the ideology Trump and the Republican Party have preached has, for as long as I've been alive, been one of power for the rich and oppression of everyone else. Due to a spineless government, propaganda pretending to be news, poor education, and large companies controlling almost all of it we are in a worse situation that I'd have hoped.

{{< details summary="Click Here for a Long Political Rant" >}}

Trump is trying to [bully Universities](https://arstechnica.com/science/2025/10/trump-offers-universities-a-choice-comply-for-preferential-funding/) into preaching Republican propaganda and silencing free speech. Fortunately some Universities have taken [a stand against this evil order](https://arstechnica.com/culture/2025/10/with-deadline-looming-4-of-9-universities-reject-trumps-compact-to-remake-higher-ed/). Little things like law and public opinion never stopped a fascist before, why should it now? Trump will attack them on every front till they either give up or he gets the law on his side and forces them to give in.

Trump illegally deployed more troops on US soil to silence protests as well. In all likelihood the Republicans want to spur on violence to justify their propaganda and actions. There is footage of ICE agents pulling protesters across "Do not cross" lines so that they could justify attacking the protesters. There is footage of ICE agents boxing drivers in so they could be dragged out of their car. They are harassing US Citizens, permanent residents, and undocumented folks alike. ICE are an unregulated and overfunded private police force for the Republican Party. I know facts and republicans don't get along so I'm not really convincing anyone here, but it is still a fact these goons are an authoritarian weapon. 

The Republican party even [tried to control the Python Foundation](https://www.theregister.com/2025/10/27/python_foundation_abandons_15m_nsf/) (see, politics effect open source too). They would give a grant that had the stipulation that the foundation stop any diversity initiatives. For those who don't know, the Republican Party has considered hiring people based on merit and not race as discriminatory. The story conservative propaganda gives is that DEI (diversity, equity, and inclusion) excludes white men in favor of underqualified minorities. If you think about it for even a second this narrative falls apart, but that is the story millions of Americans are spoon-fed every day. The way they define it and the reality conflict so greatly that the Python Foundation had to turn down the grant even if they were to stop DEI initiatives all together. Hire someone who is a minority? DEI. Build a wheelchair accessibility ramp? DEI (actually, that is what DEI is about, but I digress). Hire someone who is gay? DEI. You get the picture. The Republican Party is holding funding that should be used to improve vital tech infrastructure ransom for some misguided identity politics. Remember, any time someone uses the terms DEI or Woke in a derogatory way, it means 'anything I don't like'. You can't win when negotiating with fascists.   

Someone there is an even more pressing issue than all this, both the [Democrat and Republican parties choose to hold the national budget hostage while they play power games and collect paychecks](https://www.npr.org/2025/10/30/nx-s1-5589849/government-shutdown). The gist is that Democrats don't want cuts to the subsidies for medical care that millions of Americans rely on, the Republicans (who have the majority) already voted to apply those cuts and they are part of the new budget. Neither side will compromise on the medical coverage budget and thus the entire budget cannot be approved. This in turn means no one is getting paid (including workers that aren't allowed to strike like air-traffic controllers), no one is getting government support (food, child care, housing assistance, etc.), and the money that was being used to fund much needed programs is either being misused by the Trump administration, being used to change banners on government websites to blame Democrats (because lies are always in season, even when people are starving), or sitting around collecting dust. It gets even better though, one of Trump's rich buddies apparently gave a [large bribe to the US Military](https://www.cnn.com/2025/10/24/politics/anonymous-donor-military-pay-shutdown), ignore the fact that this amount of money is nothing compared to the actual operating cost of the military, this money should not have been donated like this in the first place. Corruption is also nothing new for this administration.

While my friends are worrying about if they will have food this month and government employees worry about if they will have money to pay bills, Trump is building a ballroom and his cronies are racking in profit. 

{{< /details >}}

We need to put an end to this. My girlfriend has to constantly look over her shoulder when going out in public to avoid being harassed by ICE (she is a US citizen, but the wrong skin color for the racists). My trans friends have to worry about idiots threatening them because some far right speaker (Kirk) said being trans people are dangerous. Trump made being anti-fascist or non-christian a pre-crime. I really wish this was just some left-wing propaganda, but it isn't, it is reality.  

 
## Links:

### Projects

[cbonsai](https://gitlab.com/jallbrit/cbonsai) is an ASCII bonsai tree generator, written in C (in case that was not obvious from the name). I used it to generate the tree in the lover right-hand corner of the website if you are looking at the site in dark mode on desktop. This is one of those not very useful projects that makes me happy.

### Articles

Drew wrote about the [soullessness modern emoji in comparison to emoticons as well as the problem with being hyper specific](https://friendo.monster/posts/emojis-are-shit/). The only time I use emoji are as icons and when texting my girlfriend because she likes them (though even she prefers Signal's sticker packs). I'm not personally very expressive in a way that lends itself into using emoticons or emoji in text, but I've occasionally used emoticons outside of conversations with my partner. Emoji are the natural evolution of emoticons because everything touched by corpos and capitalism needs to be stripped of personality and made as generically broad as possible while simultaneously being hyper specific. Anyway, I found Drew's excellent post via Wouter's [September Favourites](https://brainbaking.com/post/2025/10/september-2025/) post.

Wouter wrote about his experience [making his own fountain pen](https://brainbaking.com/post/2025/10/i-made-my-own-fountain-pen/). Sounds like a truly amazing experience. Go give it a read.

Wouter also wrote about how the [Warez scene helped him discover many PC games when he was young](https://brainbaking.com/post/2025/10/i-owe-warez-for-properly-discovering-crpgs/). I was a little too young and had way too slow internet growing up to really experience the Scene in its heyday, but piracy was still a big thing when I was young. I still have mixed feelings regarding the morality of piracy, especially considering how exploitative everything is nowadays and how broken copyright laws are, but overall I only play games I buy legally or are out of circulation. I remember kids at my school loading up USB sticks with games to play on the school computers before the school's IT disabled the USB ports, then they did the same thing with CDs after and eventually the school's IT disabled those too. Online storage was far too expensive back then otherwise the students would have just downloaded their games from Dropbox onto the school computers every day. Piracy is making a comeback due to all the anti-consumer behavior in almost all industries. Part of me thinks that it is a moral duty to pirate as a statement while the other part of me thinks that we should not be stealing luxury goods. Anyway, Wouter's writing is far more entertaining than mine, go check it out.

Sophie Koonin [writes her website for humans and not vc-funded bots](https://localghost.dev/blog/this-website-is-for-humans/). I think she speaks for all of us in the independent web world. It is sad to see people are actually liking the AI slop results over actual human interaction. Then again, it takes effort and we live in the era of instant gratification over quality. At least I know that what I'm getting from my RSS feed is made by people. 

Manu wrote about the [issue with lack of nuance online](https://manuelmoreale.com/thoughts/my-issue-with-the-two-sides). Thanks to the way the internet works and how it pushes for short, aggressive, and divisive opinions it is hard for progress to be made in any cause or public conversation. Even the 'good' side in something often ends up advocating for extreme ideas that are ultimately harmful and scare people away from the underlying cause. When you disagree with one small detail about the 'stop kicking puppies' movement you become a hated puppy kicking sympathizer, even though you are clearly anti-puppy kicking. One of my most hated features of social media is that not only is there a lack of nuance in major discourse, the moment someone expresses any nuance they are thrown into a fire. Don't get me wrong, I am prone to hyperbole just like everyone else. Unfortunately people online don't realize that I'm self-aware of it and there is more nuance to it. At the end of the day it makes me fearful of expressing opinions online because I know that no text I write will ever convey all my thoughts on a subject and even if it did people would strip it down into a parody of what I actually mean. I don't believe that all sides of every argument have or deserve nuance, but I understand what he is getting at. I have a half written political post that is part response to this, but it is still sitting in my drafts folder. 

Ruben Schade [uses Hugo for his website and shares his thoughts on if he would recommend it](https://rubenerd.com/do-i-recommend-hugo-for-blogging/). I think he described my thoughts about it well. I don't have nearly as many posts as he does, but there has always been a concern about scaleability that Hugo solves. It has issues and I've had to update my theme several times since switching over to keep things compatible with new versions, but it is a small price to pay for the flexibility and speed Hugo provides. They really shouldn't be breaking userland though. Ideally the syntax would not change, even if the implementation under the hood did. Hugo is great, but I would love for my theme to work the same way it does now 20 years in the future.  

### Videos

Sam Kern from Afterthoughts talks about how [we can fight fascism and oppressive rule every day with small actions as well as why we should not give up hope because protest works](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cyU50dserEY). Even small and temporary actions are very useful in opposing evil and oppressive governments. I have a friend who thinks protest never works, but they have never looked outside. Even symbolic protest has value in helping build community and concrete protest has overthrown governments.

Alex from Hobby Built [made one of the most amazing coffee tables I've ever seen](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XfUF_GMS5fE). He has some videos going over each step of the process, but this is the video I landed on while scrolling the interwebs. Wireless charging, slip ring rotating base, a task light, cup warmer/cooler, and a water cooler all in one small table. Really high quality production values too.  

Anthony Gramuglia talks about the [evil of censorship, how it has been gaining ground in the United States, and what we can do about it](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pMltCURWLNA). It is no surprise that some groups currently in power are afraid of people who think. Groups like Collective Shout and the US Republican Party are always looking to ban things they disagree with. One of the most popular ways to get something banned is to call it pornographic. They love to target anything that depicts real world issues (often caused or perpetuated by their own views) such as racism and lifestyles they don't agree such as LGBT+ people or really anything outside what they call 'normal'. In any case, anyone who is advocating for censorship doesn't have your or kids best interests at heart, they want control over the way people think. Unfortunately a lot of media challenges happen quietly and without challenge. Most of us don't have the time or energy to look at what some wannabe dictator wants to ban each week nor do we have the money to put financial pressure on companies every time a challenge is placed to prevent them from caving in like the cowards they are. Still, we can support the media we care about and be vocal about each ban we learn about, at the very least we can weaken their power. Ultimately we need to push for political action to prevent bans in the first place. The fact that an angry random nut job can get a book pulled from a library because holding hands is too explicit for them is a systemic problem. 

MagmaBow made an [open source camera slider](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eMA7P84G4EA). It is all on [Printables](https://www.printables.com/model/1431670-motorised-camera-slider). This is an awesome project. When you want to get stable movement a camera slider is the right tool for the job, but they are prohibitively expensive. Maybe with a few iterations this could be a budget friendly option.

CuriousInLCL explains what he sees as the [appeal of Visual Novels](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uT90_EdtgGg). I will admit his video falls into the word soup territory more than a few times and feels like he is thinking out loud, but I think he gets to a good conclusion in the end. The visual novel medium has a history of games that push the boundaries of acceptable storytelling, combine multiple mediums into one (books, music, sound, drawing, etc), are accessible to develop, and have a somewhat high barrier to entry (requiring some media literacy as many reference or provide commentary on otaku culture). These factors combine to help create a very meaningful experience for players that is impossible or very hard to achieve in other mediums. My own personal notes: I have some friends who don't get it or have a very skewed view of visual novels as reading, but worse and full of trashy adult games. To be fair, a lot of visual novels are absolute garbage, but it is thanks to their ability to be easily produced and the fact that there is generally less publisher oversight in their production that also produces some of the most amazing stories every written. Visual novels are basically what is good about indie games, but more. I need to write my own analysis of the medium one day, but I need to stop before I turn into word soup like the linked video. In any case, give it a watch if you want to see a small video essayist do his best to talk about what he sees in the medium.

Elliot Sang talks about the [American right wing obsession with cow products, food inequality in the U.S., and how it all ties into fascist ideology](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i9_jcVlCJnc). It is a bit of a log video, but Elliot covers a lot of good stuff. Being uninvolved in the more extreme social media (Instagram, Twitter, and other short form/reactionary places), I was not as aware of how prominent the raw milk, carnivore diet, etc. stuff was. I was already aware that it was a fringe diet effecting the manosphear, but apparently a lot of higher up Republican talking heads have been pushing very hard for it too. Elliot's hypothesis about controlling diets does make sense though. If eating like an American means drinking raw meat milkshakes I'm probably un-American because I am not doing that.  

Robert Skinner made an [interesting lamp](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mKsrxO2bM0c). The production quality of his videos and the way he describes his process are both incredible. 

So last year Works by Design released an amazing video showcasing [his design process for a pawn chess piece that physically transforms into a queen when it gets promoted](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CSOnnle3zbA). He is back with [a full set of pawns](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5lISr1OjhjQ) that turn into each piece that they can be promoted to and a chess variant that allows promotion from the first move. This is truly amazing work and the video itself is masterfully shot and edited. Well worth a watch.

Bashbunni talks about how she [finds answers and documentation for coding without using AI](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Jko7VqacHY). Generative AI is not a good tool for learning something new as it is prone to error. There are a bunch of other problems with AI, but ignoring the ethics of it there is a lot of issues with using a random number generator to try understanding things. Fortunately Bashbunni explains how to find real documentation to help learn tools. Once you understand the basics of how to use something you might find value in AI if you aren't AI adverse (like I am) as you will be able to spot flaws in the explanations and better work around its limitations. I'm not saying that AI can't be useful for some people, but it is not a tool for beginners trying to learn something new nor is it a substitute for good documentation.

Full Stack Woodworking made [a desk that displays a beehive simulation using LEDs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gZvzyCj3N_o). The process looked grueling, but the results are amazing. Bees are beautiful and complex creatures; a simulation will never do them justice, but this is one of the most amazing projects I've seen. Then again, I love bees and my dad was a woodworker so I am bias.

Dan McClellan gives an example of [how right wing news and content creators manufacture Christian outrage against education](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Z5vGLtRnTw&pp=ugUEEgJlbg%3D%3D). It is no secret that new outlets like Fox are happy to lie about almost anything as long as it gets clicks and propels their party forward and one of the lies they love telling the most is that higher education hates Christians. In this example a person on social media 'misunderstood' a part of a textbook about identity, even after getting clarification she went on Fox News to spread misinformation. Even if she was ignorant of the truth she is a college student and should have had the basic thinking skills to look things up or listen to her professor, this is malicious behavior. I want to highlight this example because this is the kind of propaganda conservative Christians are spoon-fed in the US. There is a very real Christian persecution complex in the United States that is largely manufactured by right wing authoritarians. I've lived through it since I was young, there was always talk about how schools are anti-Christian or how Democrats want to remove Christians from public life. All of it is lies, but to someone who only hears that side of the narrative it is the truth. The anti-education bias is one of the strongest tools authoritarians have as education teaches us to think critically and with nuance, things that undermine authoritarian, capitalist, and Republican rule.

Bread gives a [little overview of GIMP and how she uses it](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XANUrcefKq8). Poor souls who use Adobe products might not be aware, but unless they are an Adobe power user there are free or affordable alternatives that will likely do all you need and more. Bread's very brief overview of GIMP is targeted at Photoshop users and I think gives a good overall argument in favor of trying it out over using Photoshop. This is not a full on tutorial, but hopefully this helps any of you who are trying to escape Adobe.

Joseph from Unsolicited Advice argues that [interpreting author's intent isn't the only value in literary analysis/interpretation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=riU59TBB8W0). It is very strange to think some people think that building upon an author's work in your interpretation is a bad thing. Literature is, as all forms of communication, a conversation between the creator and the consumer. Even if the author didn't mean for their work to be 'that deep' that doesn't mean you can't build upon it with your own interpretation and understanding. The worse part of the 'it is not that deep' mentality is that it encourages people to throw away any meaning that is not explicitly stated by the author of a work, killing all critical thinking. Joseph doesn't mean that we should just build a straw man, we need to be able to backup our interpretation with an understanding of the work. Basically we shouldn't just dismiss an interpretation of something without trying to first understand it and we should not be afraid to build upon our understanding of something other people have made.

LaurieWired talks about [how to embed an invisible backdoor inside a compiler, roughly covers the mitigation techniques for such an attack, and why something like this is horrifying](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fu3laL5VYdM). This video is a great starting point if you are curious about the subject.

Andrea Pitzer talks about [the power of peaceful protest and what comes next afterwards](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DeOVwwATutg). You might be tired of seeing all these anti-fascist protest videos, but I'll keep sharing them. Even if you aren't in the U.S. you should be mindful of what is going on in your country as more governments try to push for censorship, anti-privacy laws, and general authoritarianism. 

## To Another Month

If you haven't already guessed from reading any of my writing or my strong stance towards freedom, I'm anti-fascist and probably whatever the republicans think Woke is today (it often changes). US politics is awful for those of us in the US, sorry to my non-US readers who have been subjected to my and everyone else's rant on the subject. I'm so very tired, but November is voting month. It is also a month that has traditionally been busy at my work place.

Hopefully I will be able to produce some fun and/or useful posts in the future for you. Things have been crazy, but we have to stay optimistic. We have to build the world we want after all and making stuff online is a small step towards that.

I have a lot more photos to post as well. Please look forward to that. I'm learning more with each photo I take.

Have a great month and feel free to share your own writings/videos/cool internet things with me at the email linked below the post. I would love to see them and share next month.
