---
title: "December 2025 Review"
date: 2026-01-01T12:20:59Z
authors: 
- "Matthew Lamont"
draft: false
tags:
  - Monthly Favorites
  - Monthly Review
slug: /december-review/
keywords:
  - Review
description: A lot has happened this month. Lets go over what has been going on in my world and share some fun links. 
---

This month was a lot calmer than last month. I enjoyed video games and quality time with my girlfriend for the majority of it. I did visit my family for a late Christmas on the 27th, went on a date with my girlfriend to our customary Little Tokyo, and had a lot of crazy busy work days.

I also got really sick yesterday and am still sick today, my throat is on fire. That is not something you want when 90% of your job is answering phone calls. I'm very thankful for the New Year's holiday. 

In any case, this has been a slow month so let's get into the other things.

## Things I Learned

As a KDE Plasma user I'm always looking for ways to use the tech built into the desktop to make my workflow more useful. KDE has a very useful (and sometimes buggy) search indexer called `baloo`. Normally you interact with it using Plasma Search/Krunner, but you can use it from the terminal. This not only makes it scriptable, but you also see all results in the database whereas when using Krunner it truncates the results. To use it you can run `baloosearch6 <query>` and it will display the results. So I can find all 954 photos of my cats with `baloosearch6 "tag:cat"`. You can pipe the results into `wc` if you are curious about the number of results by the way. This is going to make things a lot easier when I need to find particular files. Encourages me to use tags more than just for my photos too. 

## Games I Played

### Cyberpunk277

Cyberpunk 2077, I went back and finished it last month. The narrative is great and the mechanics are fun, as I've said in the past. There are some problems though. The game has little in way of mechanical consequences, tells more than shows, and is a little too easy. 

From the very start you choose a life path that is supposed to be the backstory of the main character, V. This choice does have some minor consequences in that it will give you different dialogue options and might unlock easier ways to complete some quests, but it doesn't change the overall flow of the game. There are no consequences for any dialogue choices you make during the intro sequence, a theme throughout the game. The choices that are made later during the game rarely have consequences and the ones that do are usually self-contained to the quest or quest chain you are playing though. Every place in the game where you have an option to solve a problem using a skill check, dialogue option, or other mechanic can be resolved with an option that doesn't involve any of them. For example there will be a locked door that can be opened with a skill check or by convincing a guard that you are supposed to be allowed in (great), but then you could also find an unlocked window you can jump through on the other side of the building, trivializing the whole thing. They wanted to avoid locking players out of content and in turn they made the experience a lot more shallow. Anywhere that there are skill checks that are required to progress the game the skill requirement is the lowest level possible (three in this game) so they may as well not have it in the first place. Violence is also often an answer without meaningful consequences. Narrative might say do it peacefully, but go in guns blazing and you will still get paid and still continue the quest chain. 

The game loves to tell you things, but rarely shows you or ties them to mechanics. You are told Jacki is your best friend, through a cutscene that could have been turned into a good tutorial. You are told so and so is powerful or that the guy who runs a place is a great family man, but rarely do you ever see it. It is all lore dumps, again without consequence.

I deliberately made a glass cannon stealth build, get caught, you die. That made the game a lot more fun, but the game quickly got easy as it progressed. The Phantom Liberty expansion had some tough fights, but overall the game didn't want me to lose too often. You will never need to prep for a fight as there will always be enough ammo and your consumables recharge. Money is also never an issue, even things that were money gated in the earlier versions of the game are trivial as you will quickly have a lot of money from missions.

There are some amazing things with this game though. I still recommend it. The narrative is well written most of the time, the characters are usually fun, the world itself is very detailed and put together (even though it is completely disconnected and sometimes at odds with the mechanics). While I think the mechanics lack narrative consequence 90% of the time there are points where the game will trick you into thinking you are playing an RPG and they are wonderful. The netrunning mechanic is one of the best implementations of a 'magic' system I've seen in an action game and the knife throwing mechanic was lots of fun. I can't speak for the other mechanics much as my build was the knife throwing stealth netrunner, but it was fun. Just don't go in thinking you are going to get a deep RPG with complex and interwoven mechanics/narrative, this is not an immersive sim, this is an action game with RPG style progression and a good narrative.

The endings hit really well. I could feel the heartache in the characters both narratively and in the presentation. The story delivers on its themes well and the presentation is top-notch. I do wish it had more depth, but overall an amazing game. As a side note, Phantom Liberty is the best part of Cyberpunk. I highly recommend getting the expansion.

Overall the game is good, just not great. A solid 7/10 experience that is easy to digest and have fun with as long as you don't go looking for more than what it is.

### Atelier Sophie

Still playing through this one, but made a lot of progress and have been on a roll with it, I'm at the part where you need to defeat the Unliving King boss. This game does everything Cyberpunk does wrong really well. The crafting mechanic is core to the narrative, to combat, and to almost everything else. Characters are likeable and you are given lots of glimpses of their daily lives and their relationships with each other. Music is great for what it is, you won't likely remember a specific track, but it is very cozy RPG music (the switch Mysterious Trilogy physical comes with download codes for the soundtrack). There are no real choices, but there are mechanical consequences like getting rewarded more money for turning in a high quality version the items you were supposed to deliver. The mechanics and story are tied together. It is has been far more fun than many of the other games I played this year, but it is also a game that I stop playing for months on end and then go back to. Maybe 2026 will be the year I finish it and start the next game in the series.

I think most people should try an Atelier game if they are okay with a slower game that sometimes gets a bit overly anime. These games are 70% crafting, 25% dialogue, and 5% everything else and that might scare away people, but they are worth it. I won't give a score till I complete it, but I'm loving it so far. As a side note, my partner started playing one of the games in the series, this is her first non-Pokémon turn based JRPG. 

## Links:

### News

### Cool Projects

Wayback Machine [browser extension](https://help.archive.org/help/save-pages-in-the-wayback-machine/). There are a lot of ways to save stuff to Archive.org, but the browser extension has some very useful features like auto saving pages as you surf them and automatically opening an archived version of pages that do not exist anymore. I'm still playing around with it some, but it adds some peace of mind knowing my monthly links will be archived in the event that someone's website goes down. Ideally the internet would be forever as long as the person who originally published something wants it to be, but the reality is websites only go on for as long as people keep paying their bill. Print media has a longer shelf life, but the internet archive does help a lot.

### Articles

Joel [has to customize everything](https://joelchrono.xyz/blog/gotta-theme-them-all/), something I can somewhat relate to. To be fair, Joel is creating his own themes and custom configs whereas I'm just messing around with existing themes and making small tweaks to everything, but it is a relatable thing nevertheless. Every device I own has something done to it, home brew on the 3DS, Koreader on my Kobo, custom Android ROMs, etc. I've stuck to KDE as my Desktop environment, but tinker with everything I can. It is fun, even when you don't have strong creative abilities. The power to make tech do what you want is a wonderful thing that mostly Open Source has given us. 

Astrid Poot wrote [about making and happiness](https://lekkersamenklooien.nl/wantzozithet/the-7-lessons-i-learnt-about-making-and-happiness/). I think this ties into Joel's customize everything post very well. Making things is what we humans are made to do, when we create we are happy and when we are happy we are more creative. Astrid writes about the lessons they learned over the years while making. A very lovely article. This was found via [Wouter's November blog post](https://brainbaking.com/post/2025/12/november-2025/). 

A while back Matthew Cambion wrote about [owning his talents or rather rejecting the idea of them all together](https://starbreaker.org/grimoire/entries/who-owns-your-talent/index.html). This was in response to a post on Mind Over Matt(er) about how [sharing talents creates pressure to continue sharing them in some form of communal ownership](https://blog.matterr.wtf/shared-talent-shared-visibility/). My own view of is more in line with Matthew's, but I think we should not let social pressure or fear of others prevent us from sharing our abilities. We should not allow society to force us into specialization, we can take their praise and critique and improve from it without feeling obligated to do so. I know this is not possible for everyone, some people feel the pressure is too great. For them maybe it is better to not create publically or use a pseudonym instead of their real name, a persona they can drop when the pressure becomes too great or they feel stagnant and want to try something new. 

Alex Chan writes about the [difficulties with archiving social media](https://alexwlchan.net/2025/hard-problems-in-social-media-archiving/?ref=techtea.io). She contrasts the difficulties of archiving things at scale with her own personal archive. There are so many things that are difficult about the process from a cultural, legal, and technical level. I won't repeat what she said, but one thing that stood out to me recently was going back through my collection of visual memes I've saved from my friends or discord. These little jokes are often very culturally relevant to the moment they were created and shared, few are eternal and almost all are an in-joke that will mean nothing years from now. They tell stories about our values and world views at the time, but anyone trying to study them will have a hard time in a hundred years. Our archives are only useful if we can capture and connect the cultural context behind them. 

Kev shared his opinions about [Cloud vs. Local services](https://kevquirk.com/blog/local-vs-cloud/). I mostly agree with him that this debate often falls into false comparison territory with people believing local means no sync or the loss of many core functions that people need. Usually local control means getting an off the shelf NAS system to act as a home server, use the built-in 'store' to download apps (usually docker containers on Linux systems and Jails on BSD systems), and use basic reading comprehension skills to get things working. Sometimes things get more complex for more complex needs and then we venture into sysadmin territory, something that not everyone wants to do. I will admit that at that point it might be tempting or even worth it to some people to pay for outside providers to manage the services these users need. Do I think the convenience is worth the loss of control? No, and it is often more convenient to run a few docker containers on a computer you control than relying on a VC backed startup or Big tech company that only sees your data as training fodder for their new AI product. There are rare situations where a home user might need a cloud product, but those are rare. People choose cloud out of ignorance, fear (often of responsibility, messing something up, data loss, etc), or out of laziness (cloud providers usually offer a path of least resistance). We live in an instant gratification and consumerist society, till that changes the majority will choose to outsource any hard work, even if that means a loss of control/privacy and more work in the future (because nothing is easy with big tech). 

Folkmoss shares their [feelings of inadequacy and the comfort of using AI](https://folkmoss.bearblog.dev/ai-inadequacy-and-me/). This is a hard one, especially if/when you are punished by others for asking questions. Many people turn to AI because the humans in their lives taught them to be afraid of asking questions. While I still hold that people should never use generative AI to learn concepts they are not already familiar with and that gen AI as it is today is mostly awful technology, I do sympathize with this idea. LLMs are designed to be comforting and validate everything you say positively, most importantly they are designed to be addicting. We need more than legislation and anti-AI tools if we are to beat predatory AI tech: we need to create a welcoming space where people freely share their knowledge, a space uniquely human where we can express our messy and often contradictory selves, a space that is not without conflict but is still full of love. Mainstream and corpo tech will never give us that, by its very nature it can't be anything more than a slop machine designed to prey on our insecurities. Anyone who punishes a curious mind for asking 'dumb' or 'wrong' questions is just another slop machine, no better than Claude, OpenAI, or any of that other trash. Be compassionate, be patient, and build a better world. 

Diederick de Vries talks about his [experience with the Google Play Store on modern Android devices](https://thefoggiest.dev/2025/09/08/buying-something-that-you-hate). I've not used the Play Store in years at this point, but it was always fairly annoying and, unsurprisingly, even worse now. How do people put up with it when F-Droid and Aurora exist? Sure they have their own problems, but at least they don't harass you and try to get you to tap on apps you never asked for. Technology that doesn't respect people is not fit to exist, for technology is supposed to exist to aid people. I understand that there are times when you need to use it anyway, as is the case in Diederick's article, but this shouldn't be the case. 

David Revoy shared a cute comic on his blog regarding [Mozilla's constant attempts to kill themselves](https://www.davidrevoy.com/article1108/mozilla-right-now). I don't want an AI browser, I want a web browser that gives me agency to search and explore the web. On a related note, Kev shared his thoughts on [Mozilla's attempts to burn all good will it has on his blog](https://kevquirk.com/blog/is-firefox-firefucked/). These two go together very well.

Nic Chan talks about an [infuriating design trend they were asked to create for a client](https://www.nicchan.me/blog/the-f-off-contact-page/) and how designers can attempt to avoid being forced into a situation like the one they faced. A lot of major companies have "contact" pages on their website that discourage people from actually contacting them. This is not necessarily a bad thing, it does mean that I will never be their customer if I can avoid it though. I'm not a decision maker at work, but my supervisor does listen to my opinions and we have implemented technology I've recommended before. If it is a FOSS solution it is fine by me that the maintainer doesn't have a contact page, they have a life and aren't being paid. If the solution is costing us money though, they better have a contact page and timely response times, that is what we are paying for. Designers, please stand up to clients trying to implement anti-consumer design when possible. It is not always possible, but the web will thank you every time you advocate for good design. Also, Nic's website is awesome in its design.

Wouter Groeneveld [went back into teaching](https://brainbaking.com/post/2025/12/i-changed-jobs-again/), this time without the research side of academia. I remember his last article and the problems he mentioned with academia, but it sounds like he found a decent place now that better matches his need for a work-life balance. Congrats and I hope this works well for you Wouter. Over in California it is hard for teachers to get classes let alone tenure due to oversaturation in the market. His journey makes me think about how mine would have gone if I continued going to school, tried to become a teacher like I dreamed to do, or stuck to working as a developer for a major corporation. Being content with where you are at is the real dream though. For me it means having freedom and being able to help others, something both my personal and professional life have given me in reasonable measure recently. I don't know what exactly that looks like for Wouter, but from his article it sounds like he has found a great measure of contentment for the time being.  

### Videos

Campbell Walker from Struthless gives [a critique and some solutions for social media platforms and Australia's poorly thought out social media ban](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CCXnZIjSj1Q). I'll continue to say age verification and digital identity tech are terrible for everyone. Campbell Walker gives a good overview of the problem, explains why and how both sides of the argument (from governments and social media platforms) are designed to manipulate you, and how we can create real social and political changes to the internet. A major key is removing the unregulated capitalist motive from controlling the web. Create regulation, communally owned commons (government owned, non-profit, etc.), punish platforms that do evil, etc. You can already see a better internet when you get away from the corporate web, Campbell argues for making the web more like what we see in indieweb spaces (though he never mentions the indieweb).

f4mi continues to do interesting stuff, this time [repackaging new dye sub printer cartridges in old cartridge bodies to revive an old Canon printer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=66CPBIGIdPg). Many printers, like almost everything these days, are boggled down with DRM and other anti-consumer junk. While this is more prevalent with consumer printers, almost all printers have some kind of problem. It is a joke in IT that printers are the root of all evil. Saving one of these infernal machines from the landfill is great, but it is very sad that printers are so disposable. I'm in the market for a good entry level photo printer, if any of you have recommendations that don't need proprietary cartages let me know. 

Kevin Noki built a [C64 inspired laptop](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H5QQ0ECfwyE). He also made it work with C64 peripherals. Really like the idea of this project. The C64 has an awesome style that needs to be used more. The project itself is amazing and well worth a watch. 

How do you design something that lasts 10,000 years? John Mauriello from Design Theory [explores that question, the challenges related to preservation, and a project that seeks to do just that](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5a88lZuadoQ). Even if my website survives well after I'm gone, who will read it and who will understand it? How will someone without the cultural context and links to the web pages I linked to see what I wrote? There is a high likelihood they won't. Language and culture changes. The assumption that my website will even exist still is very farfetched. Nevertheless, I hope we can preserve as much as possible for future generations. Check out the video, it is very good. 

DocJade wrote a [floppy disk filesystem so he could play Factorio off of floppy disks](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cTPBGZcTRqo). This is the kind of impractical and dumb thing that computers were meant for. He goes over the basics of how the filesystem works, his thought process when developing the filesystem, and the challenges that come with trying to build a filesystem that loads over a thousand disks into memory one at a time. He also provided the [source code on github](https://github.com/DocJade/fluster_rs).

The Financial Diet does a deep dive into why people are [more divided, closed-minded, and right wing than the prior generation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3rfktZynOmc). A combination of social media, long term negative policy changes, constant right-wing propaganda, and generally being poorer make people less willing to be politically active in ways that benefit everyone. There is a lot in this video, but it does help give an idea on why true Liberal philosophy is in the decline in pop culture. On a personal level I think this is caused both by the economic and political pressures addressed in this video as they have always been true, but also the general culture shift that the internet has promoted. The corporate web prioritizes engagement, encourages people to be brands rather than people, and silos them off into insular bubbles that only promote the most extreme viewpoints. People who grow up in such an environment have to really fight to escape it. 

## To Another Year

This year was crazy, but we made it through. We saw AI get worse, the U.S. government show how incompetent and outright evil it can be, and we saw a lot of good writing from people who care about the open internet. I picked up photography and have been having a blast with it, though I need to take more photos. I even started a bullet journal like notebook and wrote in it almost every day this year. A lot of good things happened this year, I need to keep focus on those good things.

I'm sorry to my readers who likely didn't want to hear about U.S. politics, it is hard not to say things when you see people getting attacked by law enforcement without a warrant. I've toned it down, but I do have a few drafts that need to be reworked about my thoughts on the current U.S. government, the AI craze, and the death cult that is late stage capitalism. 

This coming year I want to focus on two things; 1. making it easier for people to access and enjoy tech that doesn't abuse them and 2. curating links to stuff real people made. Mostly that means writing tutorials and continuing to link to interesting articles on my blog.

What are your plans this year?
