---
title: "April 2026 Review"
date: 2026-05-01T08:20:59Z
authors: 
- "Matthew Lamont"
draft: false
tags:
  - Monthly Favorites
  - Monthly Review
slug: /april-review/
keywords:
  - Review
description: A lot has happened this month. Lets go over what has been going on in my world and share some fun links. 
---

Between not getting enough sleep and having a ton of personal and work stuff to do, I've not really been active this month. My limited energy has been directed towards spending time with my partner and work so I kinda let the passive consumption virus that permeates our society get to me. The good news is that means I've collected a lot of other people's awesome work to share with you this month and I spent more time writing my opinions about what they have said. The bad news is this is a rather long article and I've not really worked much on my own projects. 

I did make an [iNaturalist account](https://www.inaturalist.org/people/invicta30903). Not a lot on there yet and I'm not sure how much I will upload if at all. A website for regular people to share and identify nature that then gets used as a database for scientists is an awesome concept and I want to support it. 

There are quite a few AI commentary articles in this month's links. Sorry about that, the subject is getting more important with each passing day as it continues to destroy the planet and the internet. 

## Anime

I don't talk much about anime and manga on here, but a while back I mentioned Witch Hat Atelier by Kamome Shirahama. It is a beautifully written and illustrated coming of age fantasy manga that really captures the magic of art. I highly recommend it to everyone, even if you hate anime and manga (imagine hating an entire medium of art, crazy). Anyway, it got an anime adaptation that I'm watching with my girlfriend. It is still airing so we are watching week to week. The quality of the animation for the first three episodes that we have watched has been amazing, storytelling is on point, and the voice acting is excellent. It isn't quite at the level of the manga, but that would be hard to beat in an animated medium anyway. Highly recommend giving it a watch if you can. 

## Video Games

### Three Kingdoms 8 Remake on the Switch

I played quite a bit (~8 hours) of the Romance in the Three Kingdoms 8 Remake on the Switch. This is my first strategy game I've played without a mouse and keyboard and my first Romance in the Three Kingdoms game. It is fairly simple, but sells the fantasy of being an officer/minister/ruler in Warring States China. The game is split up into three major phases/gameplay sections and while all three are simple, they rotate fairly quickly so you don't get too boggled down doing one thing. First is a monthly daily life kind of thing where you interact with the city, hold banquets, complete quests, and interact with other officers (this is where most of the time is spent so far in my play through). Then there is parliament where (depending on your rank) you make decisions effecting the territory; assign monthly tasks to officers, spy on neighbors, hire new officers, etc. This is also where you will be given tasks based on your rank. Then there is battle, in my current play through I've only done one battle and I was very low rank at the time. Battle is a tactical RPG style system where units move on a grid and activate tactics (RPG style skills). There is also a minigame for debating and dueling other officers.

The game has overall been lots of fun for what it is and I highly recommend it. The tutorial was easy enough to follow, the random events are plentiful though I'm sure they will get dull once they start repeating, the simulation of the different territories is well done, the art is good, and gameplay is enjoyable. There are hundreds of characters to play as, different timelines to explore, historic and completely hypothetical scenarios, etc. It isn't the deepest strategy game out there, but that makes it a lot easier to play with a controller. 

It is way too expensive to get digitally, but there is an Asian region import with English and the expansion on the cartridge that was almost reasonably priced on Play-Asia so that is where I grabbed it. I'd not pay the price they are asking for a download only game, but well worth having a physical copy. 

## Things I Learned

New Mexico and Arizona have owner builder exemptions that make earthen construction like adobe legal for people trying to build a home. In the United States, it is mostly illegal without jumping though a lot of hoops to build with adobe nowadays. Generally adobe is a free material that can be found on site so it is incredibly cheap to build with it compared to other types of construction. It is also fairly easy to build with so you don't need contractors or as much outside help as you would with the regular approved ways to building homes. To "fix" this, there are building codes that generally leave adobe out so that all adobe construction needs to be approved on a case by case bases (via expensive permit processes) and usually requires doing things that destroy the advantages of adobe. In any case, your options for affordable housing right now are build in New Mexico/Arizona or illegally build your home in whatever state you are in and hope no one notices. 

I'm thinking of looking into [SuperAdobe](https://calearth.org) as an option to solve the "I'm paying more than half my income on rent" problem. Just need to find some land that hasn't already been sucked up by VC parasites that is zoned correctly and has access to reliable internet (need internet to do my job). California doesn't like affordable housing, but SuperAdobe is actually from the state and from a city not too far from where I grew up. Might visit their campus and see what I need to do to get permits to build something like that in a desirable area. 

<!-- Apparently large amounts of people shop via social media nowadays. It is more than a little depressing to hear this. People are so lost in the propaganda that they are making brain-dead purchases. It is like fast fashion and pay it later services when you don't have the money to pay it off right away. They do not make sense. To be fair, pay it later and fast fashion take advantage of people who have no other choice, but this social media shopping is purely a self-inflicted stupidity. We need to burn these companies to the ground and remove their owners, investors, and management from society.  -->

## Links:

### Articles

This is an older one from [back when Minneapolis was under siege](https://deardara.com/so/adPmSCLoz?languageTag=en&cid=87d950fa-ce67-4a75-b818-cd52e0aaf67a) by Dara Moskowitz Grumdahl. [Operation Metro Surge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Metro_Surge) was one of the most reported on acts of federal violence against US residents so far under Trump's regime. We had it bad in LA, but they had it far worse in Minneapolis. Dara goes over the feelings and emotions people felt as ICE agents patrolled the streets, kidnaped people, and even murdered people. It was a dark time and fortunately things have calmed down on that front since then, but it is far from over. It is sad that what is still happening on US soil is but a small dot in the inkwell compared to everything else this oppressive regime is doing. No one should suffer because some rich people were not content with their ill-gotten wealth and decided they'd rather destroy people's lives. 

Wouter wrote an article about [his stance on AI filtered through various lenses](https://brainbaking.com/post/2026/04/a-commentary-on-genai-inspected-through-different-lenses/). For the most part he is negative about the technology itself and the way the world is mindlessly embracing it without taking into account the consequences and limitations of the technology. He mentions that while he doesn't think it will change things on a large scale he will still be an advocate for good things and we should all be as well. I think that his closing remarks are how we should all live our lives, even if our impact on the world is small we should stand by our values. We are not machines that have to get results for things to be meaningful, the journey towards virtue is in itself valuable even if the impacts are only personal. 

One more from Wouter that I couldn't help but be happy to hear about, [he is trying out openSUSE](https://brainbaking.com/post/2026/04/hello-again-suse-linux/). openSUSE was the my first daily driver Linux. I played around with other distros before I settled, but it was my trusty companion for many years. He is also running KDE, the best desktop environment (somewhat joking, all DEs and WMs have their place). It is hard migrating workflows, but krunner and dolphin are very powerful tools that will hopefully help any power user adjust. Dolphin's tag feature is particularly useful if you need to organize lots of files. You can run almost any command, search your browser bookmarks, and open files using krunner. I should probably write a guide to some of the cool things you can do with KDE out of the box. Also he is using fish shell, awesome. 

Sophie wrote an [article about her issues with AI](https://localghost.dev/blog/stop-generating-start-thinking/). While she has lots of issues with the tech's implantation, her post is more pragmatic in its criticisms. AI abstracts away the thinking and creativity from coding, creating technical debt and skill loss.

Back in December Bradley Taunt wrote about [Technological Purity, using one operating system and only open source software](https://btxx.org/posts/tech-purity/). He wanted to use OpenBSD for everything, but eventually the cracks showed and he had to use proprietary stuff for work, desired the ease of MacOS, and ended up using other BDS operating systems across his personal ecosystem. It is very understandable. All my personal computers, servers, and even my router run mostly FOSS software, but true tech purity is not possible. My Switch runs a proprietary OS, my work computer runs whatever slop Microsoft pushes out, and I need proprietary drivers from the Linux kernel to safely use my personal computer. Even my desire to not use AI slop generated programs is not so strong that I will stop using Lutris, Vim (still learning), or any of [the other great FOSS projects that have succumbed to AI pressure](https://codeberg.org/small-hack/open-slopware). On a moral level I do think we should use FOSS software and all software should be FOSS. On a moral and technical level I think current AI tech should not be used to create FOSS software as it is antithetical to the ideals of FOSS, but on a practical level we need to make sure tech is working for us. That sometimes means compromising when there is good software, even if it isn't FOSS or free of AI slop (as long as it doesn't create security issues or negatively impact the software's function). 

Dave Rupert [doesn't want people sending him screenshots or transcripts of the AI slop Claude generated when they approach him for answers](https://daverupert.com/2026/04/claude-no/). It irks me when people use a random number generator trained to provide positive responses over correct ones as an authority. Even if we give LLMs the benefit of the doubt and they give you some true insight, they are not suitable for nor capable of providing truth. If you come to Dave or myself with a question, don't give us Claude by proxy, tell us your question and what you have already done, use your own words and own brain, and then maybe we can help you without having to spend time correcting misinformation and reading AI generated slop. A broken clock is right twice per day, but that doesn't make it useful at telling time. AI might get things correct sometimes and make you feel good, but that doesn't make it an expert or mean it understands the stuff it spewed out.

Ruben said "[Optimism isn’t passive; it has to be fought for.](https://www.rubenerd.au/cautious-optimism/)" This is something I very much agree with. If you spend any time looking at the masses and their statements online you will get a sense that there is a strong learned helplessness among the loud folks online. I even have some friends who will tell me that "protests don't work" or that there are no alternatives to the current state of things. Optimism is not blindly thinking things will get better, it is knowing that we can make them better and accepting that sometimes things don't work out the way you wanted them to in the short term. I'm "cautiously optimistic" that people will get over themselves and realize that we have collective power to make a better world. There is more to Ruben's post than just this one statement, but it was something I very much wanted to jump on. Thank you, Ruben, for giving me another soap box to stand on.  

Kev wrote about [how he discovers new blogs](https://kevquirk.com/how-i-discover-new-blogs). In case you needed more help finding cool stuff online.

Herman talks about [the transformation of travel into a commodified collectathon of places to get done](https://herman.bearblog.dev/the-commodification-of-travel/). I've never been in a financial situation where I could travel far from home, let alone outside the country, but I love going to new places and exploring whenever I get a chance. I also like taking [photos](/photography/). Social media wants to take away the joy from any and all hobbies, activities, and connection we have with other people and the world and turn it into a product that can easily be sold. As I've grown up I've seen it more and more, people not experiencing the moment and instead they are either on their phones or in a rush to get to the next place they need to be to use their phones. Sometimes it is nice to just relax and suck in whatever activity you are doing.

Cory talks [about the open web and how conditional that openness is](https://www.coryd.dev/posts/2026/the-conditionally-open-web). The web is either a beautiful place to share resources and ideas or it is a place to exploit those who shared resources and ideas depending on how awful the user is. Unfortunately that means we as webmasters need to put up walls around our data, our art, and our resources to protect it from those who would exploit us. It is companies like Google, Amazon, and Anthropic who have violated and slowly eroded the open web, though it was never truly fully open. Cory has had to jump through many hoops to keep his site accessible, but also filter out bots and bad actors. It costs money to serve up requests to people (remember kids, that bot or bad company has a person at the helm) that exploit us. We need walls, but it also means potentially preventing regular and decent people from accessing our websits as well. 

### Videos

Lost Build Archives explains [the benefits of adobe construction and the legal challenges it faces due to lobbyists](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5fe3rP92hjY). He proposes that earthen construction is an answer for expensive housing construction and energy use. He is not wrong, but it isn't the panacea he acts like it is either. Adobe is one technique that is particularly useful in areas like where I live where the temperatures can easily reach over 100°F (37.7°C), it is often dry, and affordable housing is scarce. Adobe is one tool in an every growing tool chest for tackling housing issues in the United States. In the video Lost Build Archives does say the legal challenges builders face when it comes to earthen homes are slowly weakening. Maybe one day we will be able to legally build sustainable housing in California while keeping it affordable.  

The Spongebob Historian gives examples of [SpongeBob SquarePants media franchise being anti-capitalist propaganda](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-W5lKYTcNFQ). Maybe that is why my more conservative family members hate SpongeBob so much. Basically Mr. Krabs behavior was supposed to be a parody of extreme capitalist behavior. Unfortunately it is less of a parody and more of a one to one example of the outright crazy, evil, and self-destructive behaviors many of us have affiliated with the capitalist class. Early Mr. Krabs might honestly be tame compared to some of the things that are happening in the real world right now. In any case, this is a fun video and worth a watch if you are a SpongeBob fan. 

Zero shares his [thoughts on the tragedy of AI in the art world](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JQmpA20Y8l4). One of his favorite anime has an art style that is a popular target for AI slop producers, thus the real art is now less enjoyable for him as he subconsciously affiliates the art style with AI slop now. He mentions the value of art comes from the process of its creation and not just the fact it exists, art is a communication device between an artist and the viewer, and that even art created by someone without talent has more value than AI recreations of something beautiful. He laments that not only are those with great skill and talent being reduced to their output, but that those who otherwise do not have skill and produce their very human and flawed soulful work will be overshadowed with inhuman and technically perfect soulless work. Without an artist (AI prompt writers are not artists), there can be no meaning or conversation with the viewer, just empty aesthetics.

Tom Murphy has a problem with web browsers enforcing HTTPS where it isn't needed. Thus, [he created HTTPV, an insecure implementation of the standard made to trick web browsers into not throwing scary SSL security warnings at visitors to his website](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M1si1y5lvkk). HTTPS is generally a good thing, but it isn't without its flaws. One major one is how modern web browsers use scare tactics to prevent users from visiting websites that really don't need the tech. Websites like [Tom's](https://tom7.org) or my website don't really need the tech as we are not processing information that needs to be secured. I use it because it is forced onto us and it is free nowadays thanks to the good people at [Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org), but I'm with Tom in that the blanket security maximalism forgets nuance and maybe undermining the protocol in a fun way like he did is a good thing. HTTPS does have benefits if you are using a system that supports it, even if the website itself doesn't really need it. If anything websites that don't absolutely need HTTPS should offer clients an HTTP option so older web browsers can still access information. Progressive enhancement over blanket adoption of new standards should be the norm.

SECTOR 07 built a [Photobioreactor for growing algae that he is planning to use to make his own fish food pellets](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SLckTj_tJg4). Not only is the project cool, the presentation is amazing. He built it to look like something out of a sci-fi set and there is some great cinematography in the video. This is what the internet is for. 

Ritley shares some [truly strange and interesting video games that remind us that games are an art form](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NB7d8DsiJHk). It is a shame that strange art is not usually compatible with the capitalist need to appeal to the largest consumer base possible. It means that many truly strange and beautiful things will never be created and those that do will only ever be seen by a small number of people. Fortunately the indie everything movement combined with accessible tools has allowed artists to create these strange and out there experiences. Ritley shares four games that aren't too mainstream (there are some truly strange and artistic mainstream games too) and are truly strange for those of you out there looking for something that you have never seen before. 

The Science Elf [wrote some programs for the UNIVAC 1219B](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rU8sCbwB8XU). He even got a simple web server working on the machine. There is a bit where he runs a Minecraft server, the client connects and then server immediately hangs, but it is still impressive considering how old the computer is.

Hideaki gives a little explainer on [how to use the Los Angeles Metro](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xnne2wygZqI). Most of it is common sense or can be found on the [LA Metro](https://www.metro.net) website, but it is still a wonderful video. If you are planning to come out to LA and want to avoid driving (and you probably will want to avoid driving), this video provides a good understanding of the metro system out here.

Dr. Semiconductor [made RAM in his shed](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h6GWikWlAQA). If you were ever curious about making semiconductors at home, this is a fun video to watch. He also has a video on his channel [showcasing the lab itself](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HfSO-LCKmrA). Really cool stuff. We really are in the era of at home manufacturing. What is old is new again and cottage industry is back.

Microamp Home explains how [he made a smart home humidity and temperature sensor that works over Matter and uses very little power](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KE7bOYCYETM). One thing many people don't realize is that you can make your own smart home gadgets fairly easy nowadays thanks to how cheap and plentiful microcontrollers are nowadays. The hard part though is making them consume little power. Often power efficiency is limited to the proprietary products, but Microamp Home explains how to do it. It is a bit light on implementation details, but there is [more info on the github page](https://github.com/uamphome/matter_sensor_xiao_nrf52840) for the project. 

Adam G made [a split flap display](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-C8_AtxEEQc). I've really wanted one of these for a while now even though I've got no use for one. Sadly they are expensive to buy and difficult to make (as you can see in this video). A very cool project, can't wait to see what else he will make. If I didn't have to pay rent I'd buy a large split flap display, anyone want to donate to my ko-fi so I can buy a Vestaboard? All joking aside, it is a truly amazing project.  

Dygma is a manufacturer of ergonomic keyboards, naturally they have [propaganda on why split ergo keyboards are better than the typewriter inspired QWERTY keyboards most people use today](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7sstMtWbTnw). In this video he is going over the features keyboards have inherited from older typewriters that don't really make sense in light of how technology has advanced. I personally use a ZSA moonlander, but the video is still a good reference and doesn't come off as too much of an ad. If you were curious about split keyboards it is worth a watch. Anyone who spends more than a few minutes typing at a computer each day can benefit from a split ortho keyboard. They might be on the pricey side, but surgery to fix RSI is even more expensive (if you live in the US). 

Benebell Wen gives [an introduction to Taoism that is pretty good and a lot easier to follow than a lot of others I've seen](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ad54Mpm5UX0). It has become very common online for people to try to secularize and remove the cultural and religious aspects of Eastern thought. Fortunately Benebell Wen gives a more rounded view of Taoist belief without getting too deep into the details. The secularization of everything doesn't just happen with Eastern thought, look at Stoicism, but it is very common here in the United States for someone to remove the cultural and metaphysical aspects of Eastern belief systems to make them easier to commodify. Not saying that one needs to adhere or believe in the metaphysical stuff to gain value from a system, but pretending that the system was and is secular and not trying to understand the whole system and why it is the way it is leads to a shallow understanding of the world. 

Regular Car Reviews asks, [is commuting justified in the modern world](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iKMcs9eYvq4)? His conclusion is a well reasoned "It depends, but mostly no". He discusses American care dependency (not an issue unique to America, but one very near and dear to our hearts), how we got here, and what he thinks about forcing people who could do their jobs remotely to commute. There are benefits to going to a physical place of employment, but the downsides of a 10+ mile commute outweigh them. The problem is multilayered as is the solution, but we need to build denser cities that are more thoughtfully laid out, create more housing and regulate it so it is cheaper to live closer to work, have mixed-use zoning be the norm, and a million other small things that both of us are underqualified to go into. It is a problem that can be solved though and we really should put pressure on governments and corporations alike to remove and reduce commutes wherever possible and make the world more pleasant to be in. 

Nicole Rudolph discusses the idea that [modern people have too much stuff compared to their counterparts in the last century](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SNYWFS-nYS8). She argues that rather than having less stuff, our 1920s counterparts likely had similar amounts or more than we do. The reason why it isn't seen that way is because there was more purpose built furniture for storing that stuff, that stuff was often repairable or needed as a tool for repair, and there was generally less "trash". It is hard to justify making a nice looking appliance or storage for some electronic tool that will just brake in a few years. As we don't have as many storage solutions and the ones we do are either very poorly made or prohibitively expensive a lot of our stuff is out in the open. The stuff we have out in the open is often poorly made, not pleasing to look at, or will be replaced next year when the new model comes out. 90% of our electronic devices are literally trash (in that they cannot be repaired and have a fairly short lifespan compared to stuff made long ago) so there is no point in a phone or toaster looking like art when they are designed to break in the next 3 years. In any case, it isn't that we necessarily have more stuff; it is that we have more stuff that is out in the open and that is of low quality.  

DuctTapers Anonymous shares his take on [a tool box customized for field repair jobs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2BwVKB1s4JA). Most people don't know how to fix their stuff and even those who do might not have the tools available to perform needed repairs. This has lead to popup "repair café" events where people with repair skills either volunteer or sell their services. Due to their ephemeral nature, repair people don't get the luxury of having a full workshop with them and need to have a portable and often small workstation (these events are often held at literal cafés). DuctTapers Anonymous' build is awesome. It has its own power supply, a task lamp, and tool organization. Really like this idea a lot. 

Spectacles [proposes that representation by lottery might be a useful tool in solving modern democracy's tendency towards oligarchy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LzbJacGGt1o). This isn't a terrible idea, but I do think for it to work you would need an informed and enfranchised citizenry that doesn't exist currently. An article for another day, but we would need to remove partisan propaganda from news, improve elections with ranked choice or similar voting system where lottery is not an option, and force the government to uphold the will of those who were empowered by lottery. I don't disagree with the premise, but there is a lot to do before the United States can succeed in something like this. 

ChromaLock made a [payphone themed headset, the project didn't go as well as he expected though](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yg8_eD-1IHo). This is a fun idea, the headset uses two phones held together with a 3D printed headband, has a payphone themed headphone rest that has a working coin slot and dial pad, and it all looks the part. It broke before he could demonstrate it and he glossed over the code, but overall it is a beautiful project. 

The Next Layer shares some ideas for [reducing 3D printing's impact on the planet](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jaokWR1dlQw). This ranges from smart consumption (buying cardboard spools, using recyclable filaments, etc.) to improving print reliability to avoid waste prints. Most of this should be obvious to an echo conscious person, but there might be a tip in there that didn't occur to you. A worthwhile watch if you have or are planning to get a 3D printer. 

Bekah talks about [propaganda and how important both media literacy and slowing down the flood of (mis)information is to overcome it](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1gm-1nKr8M0). Thanks to AI, corrupt government, profit driven "journalism", and social media we are constantly flooded with propaganda even if we don't want to. Recently the goal has not only been to sow division, but make us apathetic. When every day is a new disaster, when we are constantly told how awful the other side is, and generally are force-fed a never ending stream of slop it becomes easy to be apathetic. It takes a lot of effort to tell reality from propaganda and it is so easy to just ignore it. Bekah suggests that we need to know it is happening and be more media literate, that in turn will help easy the burden. I'd also say we need to turn down the flood and be willing to process our thoughts. Use RSS feeds, look at curated lists of stuff to consume (like this one) when you want to consume stuff, be mindful of what you consume, reflect, and most importantly, don't let the propaganda win.  

Dr. Justin Sledge from ESOTERICA talks about [why he will not use generative AI as the technology currently stands](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v0VZvMmelN4). We agree with each other that the technology is currently inherently unethical and corrosive of the human experience. He claims that the way the tech was trained, the way the data centers are designed, and the types of people who enrich themselves using the tech are evil. Generative AI is a mockery of everything humans have created, filtered through the desire of endless growth and to remove the need for humans inside the capitalist machine. He is not against AI without reason and would be willing to use it if it provided true value and dignity to humanity, but as the technology currently exists he will not use it. 

## See You Next Month

This hasn't been the most positive or productive month to be honest, but we are slowly making it through. I plan to dive more into bash scripting and read more non-fiction (I finished 6 books from a novel series this month, but it wasn't really all that worthwhile) over the next month. I also plan to try watching more anime and playing more video games. Maybe go for a nature hike.

Give Witch Hat Atelier a read and watch if you have time. Don't give more to our corporate overlords than you need to. And stay safe and healthy.

If you have any awesome projects, links, or ideas to share please feel free to reach out to me. 