---
title: "June 2026 Review"
date: 2026-07-02T08:20:59Z
authors: 
- "Matthew Lamont"
draft: false
tags:
  - Monthly Favorites
  - Monthly Review
slug: /jun-review/
keywords:
  - Review
description: A lot has happened this month. Lets go over what has been going on in my world and share some fun links. 
---

There has been a decent amount of stuff happening on my end. Nothing big, but a lot of little things. Most of it has been with work so I don't have as much to share here as I'd like, but I do have some links.

The biggest thing has been that I have a new work schedule. I now work earlier and get off earlier, I actually have a few hours of sunlight after work now. It is nice and gave me a little more space to prepare for sleep before heading to bed.

I went a little crazy on the smart home tech this month. This is a part of technology that has been both amazing and dystopian, smart home tech promised us a future where a lot of our homes could be automated, freeing us from the minor annoyances that distract us from a more fulfilling life. A lot of people, however, are either barred from that reality by complex tech or imprisoned by proprietary software that likely spies on them. Fortunately the promise of smart homes can be achieved without too much complexity (though it can get there if you want) and without anyone spying on you. That is where Home Assistant comes in and open protocols like Zigbee and Thread. I've used Home Assistant with my Philip Hue bulbs for a while, but recently got a Zigbee coordinator that lets me add Zigbee devices directly. The has let me get into things like power monitoring outlets and climate sensors. I'll do a full write-up on it sometime soon, but basically I have a smart home that uses no internet, no voice commands, and no privacy compromises. I rent so there are limitations on how far I can go, but what is here so far has been useful and fun. None of it was necessary, but it is a really fun thing to tinker with. 

The [official English RPG Maker Web forums](https://forums.rpgmakerweb.com/forums/important-announcements-forum-closure.199/) went read-only this month with plans to close them down completely at the end of the year. Very sad news, but it is drawing attention to other places in the RPG Maker community and there is an effort in place to archive the forums. There is also an effort to create a new forum run by the community. The new official messageboard built by the publisher of the RPG Maker series has been around for a while, but it isn't looking to great right now. I will be updating a list of resources as things start to materialize.

## Video Games

I played "No Man's Sky" (Linux) for the first time this month and I was surprised how much more fun it was than I was expecting. It is a vast space exploration game that utilizes procedural generation in a fantastic way. It does have issues, but overall the time I've spent with it has been fun. The game gives players a lot to work with and expects them to find their own motivation to do things, has a fairly decent tutorial, and was updated for a decade after release with more updates planned. I'll very likely play it some more and it will make a great game to play every once in a while after I burn out.

I've also played "We Love Katamari REROLL+ Royal Reverie" (Switch) with my partner. This is a fantastic party game. Though I am not the biggest fan of party games, this one has a strangeness that really makes it special. Highly recommend this if you have a person to play with. The sessions are usually short, the story is absolutely ridiculous, and the gameplay itself is well tuned. Sometimes it can be a little obtuse, but even that is part of the games charms. 

## Links

### Cool Projects

Storied Colors is [a database of colors and their stories](https://storiedcolors.com), who would have thought with a title like that? This is a cool project, but the creator, Vinu, has used AI to help with the writing and that is unfortunate, though I'm glad they disclosed this. The good news is that all sources are cited, they are open to feedback, and everything is human reviewed. The website is rather awesome and I've looked at a few colors and confirmed that they do seem accurate to their sources. There are bound to be mistakes, but nevertheless this is a cool project for anyone interested in art.

### Articles

Henry Desroches writes that [we should give unconditionally](https://henry.codes/writing/a-case-for-unconditional-giving/). I agree that when we are able, we should give to those who ask. I don't agree that it should be completely unconditional, I've had more than one occasion where someone abused that generosity, but I do agree with the heart of the matter. We aren't here to judge what people do with the money or items we give, we aren't here to doubt their need, and we are not here to impose our will upon them. By the same token, I'm not condemning the people who are skeptical for good reason or who can't afford to give, but we do all have an obligation to our fellow humans to make the world a better place in whatever capacity we can.

Nate warns people that [LTS Linux distros aren't stable in the ways most people think](https://pointieststick.com/2026/05/23/long-term-support-doesnt-mean-what-you-think/). When looking at Linux distros you will see many different types of release cycles with the most common being Stable (a major update every 6-12 months with minor updates across that period for most distros), Long Term Support (LTS, these are version locked and don't get any updates other than backported security fixes), and Rolling Release (Updates are pushed out very frequently as the software gets released). This distinction can be confusing, but if you are new to Linux you will often be told go with the Stable or LTS distros. Unfortunately LTS does mean you don't always get bug fixes and there are a lot of other things Nate mentions. This isn't to say LTS are bad, but they aren't stable in that nothing breaks, they are stable in that they don't change. If you need an environment that doesn't change much and can backport software you need when there are updates, an LTS is going to be your friend. Otherwise, a Stable distro will likely serve you better.

Wouter goes over [bread baking in videogames](https://brainbaking.com/post/2026/05/bread-baking-in-video-games/). Unfortunately most games just don't give bread much thought and those that do still use a simplified baking system and will throw everything under the same cooking workstation. Rune Factory 4 does actually use different workstations for different types of cooking so you at least bake bread in an oven or steamer depending on what bread you are making. Don't know many games that use different workstations or more detailed cooking systems outside what Wouter mentions and maybe the few dedicated backing games. I really need to start baking. In other news, Wouter also [turned his blog into a printed book](https://brainbaking.com/post/2026/06/the-archivist-in-me-turned-this-blog-into-a-book/). That is really cool. 

Something else Wouter wrote that I think is very beautiful, he found that [as he ages he has engaged with media more deeply and as a result deepened his enjoyment of that media](https://brainbaking.com/post/2026/06/my-enjoyment-from-media-deepens-as-i-grow-older/).

Drew Devault writes about the [serious topic of mental health and how media and the internet sensationalize mental health crises, often making the situation worse](https://drewdevault.com/blog/Circus-freaks-of-FOSS/). This happens in the FOSS space just as it does elsewhere and as a community, the open source one has a terrible track record of looking out for its own. He uses the example of Terry Davis, the man who made TempleOS, as someone who's schizophrenia was exasperated by internet attention, eventually leading to his death. He also mentions a current situation going on with Kent Overstreet, the man behind bcachefs who seems to be going through a strong case of AI psychosis. Kent is currently being mocked and egged on online. Kent, much like Davis before him, is not an easy person to work with and was removed from the Linux kernel mailing list after repeatedly causing problems there. It can be easy for people to rejoice at the downfall of bad actors, but we need to remember that they are human, just like the rest of us. While I personally do not suffer with any strong mental health issues (at least as far as I'm aware), I have friends who have gone through crises and some who are still going through them. It is hard not knowing how to help and sometimes they are not the most friendly people due to their struggles. Rather than throwing mud at people who are clearly suffering, make an effort to understand them. Not saying Kent is a good person, but that doesn't exclude him from compassion. There are no circus freaks, only people who need just as much compassion as you and I. That isn't to say you should excuse bad behavior, I still firmly believe people should be shamed for that. I'm just saying we should all be compassionate as people struggle, even the problematic ones. Drew ended his post with a postscript about how conflicted he feels about writing what he wrote and I feel similar, but at the end of the day, when you see something that is wrong you need to call it out and Drew did.  

Dave Gauer talks about [ascetic computing, that is having an ascetic lifestyle with computers](https://ratfactor.com/ascetic-computing). This is something that resinates with me. I love computers and the powers they give us, but at the same time, computing has grown toxic in many ways. The new thing used to be cool, now it is a scam or a tech bro trying to build the new torment nexus. Removing the parts that we don't like and embracing the ones that bring us true joy is at the heart of personal freedom and self-mastery. I still have an overpowered computer that I use to play games and I do use a lot of programs, but I still understand the joy and principles Dave is talking about here.

Kami mentions [AI "art" doesn't communicate anything](https://kami.bearblog.dev/ai-art-communicates-nothing/). While I mostly agree with her, there was something else she mentioned that many people probably don't think about when it comes to art. In technical fields where AI tools can be useful for experts, they are getting to the point where they can eliminate entry level jobs (think software development and basic IT helpdesk work). The problem with eliminating those jobs is that there is no way to train the next generation of experts. Kami paints something similar in the world of art, as AI generates more meh art, people get more critical of the genuinely bad and humanly meh stuff that was human made. Not only does AI "art" lack meaning, it actively destroys the next generation of artists by discouraging people from posting strange and bad art. No matter how much hate AI "art" gets, it is never enough. 

Matthias Ott from Own Your Web talks about the [importance of curation on a web that is dying under the strain of machine generated slop, paid advertising, and decaying search infrastructure](https://newsletter.ownyourweb.site/archive/own-your-web-issue-18-curators/). Every month I write my links with this idea in mind: Not everything on the internet is worth seeing, but the things that are need to be reflected upon and shared. Curation is a form of creation that is often underappreciated because the truth is, most curation online doesn't have much thought put into it. I'm not saying my link section here is the height of curation, it isn't, but some people out there delicately search and catalogue the internet so we can find the things that are valuable to us. When you find a cool link, share it. 

### Videos

Haggis on Toast has an awesome video [where he makes a custom Home Assistant dashboard](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nCCFeGsB52g). Most smart home tech is boring and that isn't a bad thing. We want as much of the tech to be as invisible and as reliable as possible, but sometimes we need manual control and that is where dashboards come in. I'll be honest with you, I don't have much smart home tech outside of a few lights and power monitoring plugs as I rent and all that stuff is either automated or controlled by a physical switch. Though I don't need a dashboard yet, Haggis' dashboard is closer to what I'd like instead of a boring tablet on a wall. He gave it a lot of functionality for something that is just a few physical switches and an eink display in a fancy case. 

Foci goes over a [list of FOSS (and one non FOSS) Linux applications he uses for his research as a master's student](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H3mp9INbBm0). If you do a lot of research or are involved in academia you may find use from this video. Even if you don't get too into research you will likely find something interesting. 

How Money Works made a new YouTube channel called Demonetized and made [a video about why tech bros always build the torment nexus](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7F8tejaO2YM). A great video that gives some interpretations on why tech bros constantly take the wrong message from sci-fi and make it our problem.

Classical Numismatics discusses [how Romans were able to detect debasement and counterfeit silver coins](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a2awi-lgElg). Most currencies nowadays are fiat (that is, they are backed by the trust in the issuer rather than based on the value of a physical good), but most classical civilizations made their coins with some percentage of precious metals, Rome included. With counterfeits and a government desperate for cash, it was hard to trust a coin so there were many ways to test them and these methods are fairly well documented. Definitely worth a watch if you were curious or wanted to test the silver content of a coin. 

Joe from Unsolicited advice [talks about logic and the different ways it can be expressed philosophically and mathematically](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yrimaWOQtfM). I did take a basic formal logic class a long time ago and have since forgotten most of logical symbols associated with it, but I can say it has been a useful tool ever since. Joe explains several different logical theories and how they are applied to different fields. While he doesn't really go in depth, he provides a great overview for people who need to know what they don't know and even recommends a couple books at the end to help people get started. It isn't the most fun subject, but Logic is one of the foundational skills I think everyone should learn. It is a shame that they don't teach basic formal logic from a young age in schools.  

Dream Jelly talks about [the Q/A service ChaCha from the early 2000s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vbRcHf--0sA). You would basically text a message to their service and a person would send you a response. It was supposed to be a question and answer service before mobile internet was accessible to people, unfortunately it was also not the most reliable thing in the world. I remember my friends texting all sorts of questions to ChaCha (I didn't have a cell phone at the time and when I did get one I had limited texts), sometimes serious and sometimes just joking around. The service was kinda magical at the time. Now Google is trying to create the same thing by killing its search engine and replacing it with AI generated ads and unverifiable answers, we have come full circle, but without the humans.

Sean Hodgins built a [miniature model train and a fun video to go with it](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DlL3AunnM_I). His whole channel is pretty interesting. He has a meta-narrative alongside the projects he works on. Give his channel a watch. In this one he 3D prints a very small miniature train and builds a motion system so it moves along a track. I'm not doing it justice honestly. It is a great video. 

Benn Jordan [proposes that the policy decisions and actions of the fabulously wealthy that may seem stupid to us are calculated tools for extracting wealth from the working class](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4FZy1lBNykA). Now that is not a new idea, but he explains how they do it in a very digestible way and that is worth sharing. It is a bit conspiratorial, but I can easily believe that the SpaceX IPO is a tool for destroying my meager retirement savings. We have all seen how Private Equity robbed people of the safety and generational wealth that owning a home provides, even people who owned their homes outright were robbed. Our economy is being strip mined by the most wealthy to keep us just comfortable enough that we won't risk losing everything in a rebellion. I can't afford to risk being fired for trying to unionize at my work place, nor can most people I know. I'm lucky enough that I can afford to pay rent for a month without a job, but once that month is over the government will threaten violence against me if I do not find a way to pay rent or I leave. There are many people who aren't so lucky.  

Something very positive, Dinki [published another video about a Hyperland theme they made](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qOoWQeIGKiA). This one is something special that, if developed further, I might try out. A Linux theme inspired by "art nouveau and old drawings related to astronomy, science, and mythology". Who can say no to that? Computers are so utilitarian and there is always pressure to remove more personality from them as time moves forward, Dinki responded with art. Open source in general needs more designers, but I think even more than designers we need artists with technical skills. I really love how creative this one is, it is clearly a labor of love. The theme is [open source and on github](https://github.com/diinki/linux-antiquity/tree/main).  

Zack Freedman talks about [why Gridfinity became viral, how it outgrew him, and how others can try to recreate the conditions for success with their projects](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=crH-0q64vLA). It boils down to making it easy to use, easy to modify, and unencumbered by restrictive licenses. It basically boils down to: Don't try to make a product or do something because "Capitalism", do it because you want to make something useful for the world and because you want to release it to the world. To him the greatest joy is seeing himself become irrelevant to Gridfinity as it grows beyond anything he could have imagined.   

## See You Next Month

I hope you all have a great month. 

I know this one hasn't been the most interesting. I read a lot, drank tea, and stayed home. I was going to go on a trip with my immediate family at the start of the month, but my partner and I got sick so we didn't get to go.

July will hopefully be a better month, though the 90% humidity and 80-90° F weather has not been very kind to us. Hopefully it will be a month of fun and exploration, if not I might have more video games to play.
