---
title: "May 2026 Review"
date: 2026-06-01T08:20:59Z
authors: 
- "Matthew Lamont"
draft: false
tags:
  - Monthly Favorites
  - Monthly Review
slug: /may-review/
keywords:
  - Review
description: A lot has happened this month. Lets go over what has been going on in my world and share some fun links. 
---

This month was fairly slow. I did a little work on my RPG Maker game, read a lot, took some photos that still need to be uploaded, and did a lot of cleaning/organization.

My work implemented an AI chatbot trained on our company data and code. As you are aware, I have some rather negative feelings towards the way LLMs have been sold, trained, and designed. Unfortunately this chatbot is fairly useful in that it has access to documentation that I normally don't have access to so I've been using it to pull data and turn it into useful documentation for our IT team. The bot was designed to be fairly pragmatic, mostly pulling data and telling us what is where or why something is the way it is. This is honestly a half-decent way of giving IT access to find out what is going on with the database or code without giving us direct access to info we shouldn't have. If you really must use chatbots, at least make them useful. Now I have to worry about the company management thinking I can be replaced with a machine that spews out plausibly correct info. Don't think it will be replacing me anytime soon, but you never know.

One of my friends roped me into going to an event for an MLM he participates in. It was far worse than I thought it would be. I've never seen so many money focused people in one place before. Part of the recruitment tactic was acknowledging their members' achievements with trophies alongside the amount of money they made through the MLM. While some people eat that stuff up, I wanted to throw something at the presenter and call out the scam. My friend was getting an acknowledgement for getting a license though so I wanted to be polite. I'm not going to say MLMs can't work and make people money, but their inherent business structure is based on recruitment and sales, neither are things that I want to be a part of and most people do not succeed in these things. The push for recruitment was particularly awful. I got multiple people saying "don't you want to support your friend?" and "the best way to do that is to join". I swear, the manipulative tactics really get on your nerves after a while. The worst part is, a lot of the people there are convinced that they are helping people. I will never be doing that again. There was some nice free Indian food though and if it weren't for all the punchable faces getting up in my face to sell me something I'd say it was worth it. 

Outside of that; went to several events in Little Tokyo over the month with my partner for our Saturday date days and went on some nice long walks around LA. I think it would be fun to document some urban exploration going forward. There is a lot out here, but it is easy to miss.

Also I published an article about [KDE Plasma](/articles/2026/kde-plasma-tips/). Check it out if you are using KDE on Linux or curious about the powers it gives your computer.  

## Links

### Cool Projects

[Waylandcraft is a Wayland Compositor for Minecraft](https://github.com/EVV1E/waylandcraft). Basically it lets you open your Linux program windows inside Minecraft. I was unable to get it working inside NixOS, but several other people have gotten it working. Very awesome project. When I move over to another Linux distro I'll give it another try. Minecraft can now be the best desktop environment. "Linux or rather GNU+Linux+KDE+Minecraft as I've come to call it."

I made it clear a couple of times that Witch Hat Atelier is an awesome manga and last month I started watching the anime adaptation with my partner. Nerva made [a spell simulator based on the manga](https://ytnrvdf.github.io/wha-spell-simulator/). It only does fairly simple things right now, but it is still really cool to see. The code is under the MIT license and is available on [Github](https://github.com/ytnrvdf/wha-spell-simulator). He also has a [video on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zVWYW0K3ikg) explaining the design ideas and limitations of the project.

Do you need to access the modern web from your Windows 95 machine? [Browservice will let you do that](https://github.com/ttalvitie/browservice). It is a browser proxy that lets you run an embedded Chrome browser on a modern system and runs a server that lets clients interact with the web browser. These clients are served images of the site. It is a bit over my head, but looks very interesting. Unfortunately it is not heavily maintained, thus is the nature of the internet. 

### News

The Sovereign Tech Fund [donated a massive €1,285,200 to KDEf](https://kde.org/announcements/sovereign-tech-fund-invests-kde/). This investment into the project is to improve infrastructure around the Plasma Desktop and communications framework. Not sure if that means investment into KDE's internal communications or Kontact is getting much needed funding. Either way, this is good news. GNOME also got a [large donation from them](https://www.sovereign.tech/tech/gnome) if you are more into how GNOME likes things done. By the time this is published there might be more specific details about what the money is going towards.

### Articles

Chris Coyier has another post [about the fragility of the web and how to preserve it](https://chriscoyier.net/2026/04/28/when-sites-need-to-walk-away/). Archiving is something that is always on my mind. I try to use the Internet Archive to backup every website I visit, but that is not always possible. I made my own website static so in theory my website will be cheap to host for the foreseeable future, but domain registration does cost money. Not everyone can afford to set up a trust that will keep renewing the domain name. Even if they can, there is no guarantee that tech will work the same in the future as it does now. What happens when a government decides that something I wrote is illegal? Who is going to fight that battle when I'm dead? I'm not saying that what I wrote is worthy of archival, but it would be nice if it was. The IA is doing humanity a service in archiving everything they can; but they are constantly under attack by a broken copyright system, evil corporations, and governments that want to destroy our cultural legacy. The internet is full of useful information and interesting stories that might forever be lost if we don't figure out how to preserve it. Chris does bring up a good point, we need to find ways to make these sites static and then ways to host them either for free or cheap enough that those who care can keep them going. The real bottleneck will still be DNS, it is a fairly centralized system and the ones who hold the keys charge upkeep fees. 

Manu muses on [the tradeoffs he has made in his life](https://manuelmoreale.com/thoughts/accepting-tradeoffs). Every opportunity you take closes off numerous others, every relationship you form binds you to someone, every item you pick up is another you are afraid to lose. I have two cats and a wonderful girlfriend, I can't go on extended multi-week adventures away from home because of that. I have a full-time job that requires me to work evenings (12-9), but it also gives me my mornings and doesn't make me depressed like my last job. I live in LA with prohibitively high rent, I can't afford a car and the pollution is probably shortening my lifespan, in exchange I can get almost anywhere I need by bus or light rail and I can afford to go on weekly dates with my girlfriend. Sometimes I wonder about the life I don't live, maybe I could have just backpacked across the world or got my driver's license and lived out of an RV. I'm not regretting the tradeoffs I've made, but they are things I'm very aware of. We should all be aware of what we are trading away when we bind ourselves to another thing. 

Ruben [once again mentions the problem with monocultures](https://www.rubenerd.au/linux-monoculture-is-just-as-bad-for-security/). Linux is growing in popularity and so is KDE, this means more eyes are on both and thanks to AI vulnerability tools we are seeing an unprecedented number of exploits being found. It is a wonderful testament to the power of FOSS that these issues are being found and fixed, but it highlights a large problem. If everyone is on the same environment, everyone is vulnerable. The solution? Everyone should run Plan 9 or Haiku. Actually, that causes another monoculture problem. The best solution is that we use a variety of systems, naturally Ruben suggests BSD.

Kev vents about [how everything, including the protective pads and zippers on his bike jacket, is proprietary garbage nowadays](https://kevquirk.com/why-is-everything-proprietary-these-days). While we should all avoid monocultures (as per Ruben's post and the fact that it stifles innovation), standardization of parts is an amazing thing that improves the longevity, interoperability, and repairability of items. Maybe Kev's original jacket had waterproof zippers and the new one doesn't or some other kind of reason for them being different and maybe regulations have changed regarding padding, but I don't believe in giving businesses the benefit of the doubt. Unless there is a very good reason that is stated very clearly to the consumer, most things should be done with standardized parts that can be easily changed. My Prusa 3D printer might be a little on the old side in the fast world of tech, but I can easily find replacement parts from both Prusa and 3rd parties everywhere thanks to it using mostly standardized parts and the parts that aren't are open source. We need more hardware to be like that.

Terence Eden [doesn't fear being left behind as tech advances](https://shkspr.mobi/blog/2026/03/im-ok-being-left-behind-thanks/). He puts to words a thought I've always had: If something is so revolutionary that it becomes the norm, I'll learn it when it becomes the norm. Don't get me wrong, I used to be an early adopter of technologies back when it was fun. There is nothing wrong with wanting to play around with something new and I don't think Terence is arguing against playing with new tech. He is arguing that there is nothing wrong with waiting to see if a technology is actually useful. AI has some real use cases, but most of it is hype and brain-dead tech bro nonsense, crypto proved to be another unstable asset class for the wealthy to manipulate, and Flash Player is dead. I'll add to his statement on waiting till something is useful, I think it is perfectly fine to opt-out of something that is inherently unethical.

Scott Jenson talks about [how LLM tools are built in a way that discourages us from slowing down to think and breath](https://jenson.org/ma/). He mentions the Japanese concept of Ma and how it is critical to our ability to think and create. Scott proposes that for LLMs and AI to become helpful for humans, the user interface needs to promote a more human scale thought process. While I agree with him that the UX with LLM tools is where a large majority of the problems with addiction and brain rot stem, they are designed to be this way on purpose. Theoretically AI interfaces could be designed in a way that improves critical thinking and makes the process of using them more human scale, but that is antithetical to how these tools are marketed. LLMs are designed to be faster than a human, to minimize human oversight, and to be addictive. Big tech will not make a healthy AI product unless forced to by a government (and they have convinced many world leaders that their products are necessary) and unfortunately any ethical product will not succeed in the mainstream. I would still love to see ethically trained and local first AI tools that provide a mindful UX and do think they can exist, just not within the confines of capitalism. Found this one from [Jim's blog where he gives his thoughts on the post](https://blog.jim-nielsen.com/2026/software-requires-digestion/). 

Matthias Ott mentions the [cool new Lazy loading features for video and audio HTML elements and the dreadful Prompt API anti-feature that Google shipped with Chrome](https://matthiasott.com/notes/lazy-and-prompt). Lazy loading helps a lot with improving page loading speeds on heavy websites, no complaint. I won't restate everything from this article, but Google is pulling another Internet Explorer move and downloading a 4 GB AI model on people's systems, trying to force developers to sign an agreement to use the API, and generally shoving proprietary and unpredictable tech down everyone's throats. Unfortunately it is likely to work. Either the other browser engines adopt this or users will go use Chrome because websites that use this feature will only work with it. Web browsers should allow people to browse the open and free web. 

Veronica explains [how she set up a TTY only laptop so she can have a distraction free writing experience](https://veronicaexplains.net/my-first-writerdeck/). This is a fun project. As mainstream tech becomes more tuned towards distraction and upselling people continue to move towards single purpose, simple devices. 

Christopher Kirk-Nielsen [talks about why he doesn't wittingly use AI](https://chriskirknielsen.com/ai-policy/). I will not repeat everything Christopher has said as I've already gone over [my own opinions on generative AI tech](/articles/2026/ai-greed/), but it is a good reminder article.

Drew Devault [redesigned his website](https://drewdevault.com/blog/New-design/) and [switched his blog's static site generator to ZINE](https://drewdevault.com/blog/Rewrite-with-zine/). I like the new design quite a bit and it is interesting to see another SSG popup. Drew has been on a software purity quest to eliminate as much AI generated code from his system as possible. I don't think he will ever get it his way in that regard, but it is nice to see a bit more personality on his site. Drew is fairly controversial in some circles of the open source world for being outspokenly pro-human and progressive (and being fairly toxic in his youth) so his crusade against software run by or dependent on tech built by oligarchs, hateful people, and thieves is on brand. I just don't think it is possible in this day and age to avoid AI generated code completely without completely cutting ties with modern tech.   

### Videos

Jeff from Mother's Basement [talks about the scum that run the speculative collectibles market and how they do it](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W2x-UQpiARc). There is nothing wrong with making some money by selling things people want, but people who participate in speculative markets are awful. It is basically a way to get around regulations. Jeff likens these people to foreign landlords for hobbies. They take something we enjoy, try to grade it (few people who actually participate in a hobby want an unusable item), and then pump the market demand for profit. Speculative markets should be illegal in general (sorry my retirement fund), but especially when it encourages behavior like the things Jeff talks about in the video. Give it a watch, even if you don't care about manga or Pokémon cards, the scalpers are going to come after your hobby next. It is cool to have a perfect copy of something you love, but we need to shame anyone buying these graded items, shame the scalpers, shame the people running these scams, and in the end make them feel unwelcomed for their behavior. 

Amelia from Morning Mercury [sewed some houseplants because her cat kept eating her live ones](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6nwMpH7W3rc). The plants turn out lovely and it is a fun video to watch. I love the idea. The living room/my office in my apartment gets very little sunlight so houseplants are not much of an option and I have cats as well so I've been in the market for nice artificial plants, unfortunately there are no local stores that carry them. Might need to steal this idea.

The Sound Workshop [turned an Otamatone into a Trautonium](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pWP9oiSYIac) and shows us how he did it. Really cool stuff. 

Phil made a "[bricolage file server thing](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sl7V450awv4)". He threw some scraps of wood together to make an enclosure for his Mac and a bunch of disks. He was sparse about the details on if it actually is a server, but nevertheless I thought it was interesting. Sometimes the solution of our problems is not buying a new storage thing, it is taking some scrap wood off the roadside and making a new storage thing.  

*Everything Everywhere All at Once* (2022) is an amazing film that depicts the struggles of Chinese immigrant mothers and their children in the United States. There is naturally some extra context when viewed by someone from a Chinese American family. At The Pictures [shares this context for those of us who do not have it](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NyooLl0eRyQ). In my high school we actually explored this subject fairly well, so I'm not 100% ignorant of the context behind the film or the nuances going on between the two main characters, but there is only so much one can understand through limited exposure. This video gives a good glimpse into the nuanced discussion the film is having with the audience. For my own context, we read Amy Tan's *The Joy Luck Club* in high school as did many Americans and that lead into a deeper discussion on the realities of the Tiger mom stereotype, high vs. low context cultures, and the lives of people growing up in Asian-American households. My parents were on the more laid back side and I grew up in a completely different cultural context (low socioeconomic class, white, and in a predominately Hispanic town) so I can only understand the context through the stories I've consumed and the things people who lived it tell me.  

Pack Vibes uses [goldfish as an example of abusive selective breeding of animals](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6oqw_Dpcv3g). Goldfish are amazing little critters, but they have a very long history of selective breeding that has lead to several varieties that have crippling deformities bread into them. Thought I'd share this video if you were not aware of some of the varieties you might see that are inherently suffering due to genetic deformities. This is not to say all genetic modification/selective breeding is bad, but no good person would look at a pug or a telescope goldfish and say their health issues are worth looking interesting. I'm not saying you are a bad person for having one as a pet, but if you are specifically going out of your way to get them from a breeder you might need to reexamine your relationship with animals a little bit.

The Art Economist discuses [the collapse of the game publisher, Devolver Digital and how indie game publishers are incompatible with public stock markets](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CszMtocHiPE). He argues that indie publishers are like venture capital firms, they invest in a wide range of games with the expectation that there may be no return for years and many of the investments will fail. Instead, they rely on the successful games to "win". The public stock market does not tolerate any kind of setback, so when they had their IPO and became public their business model came into conflict with their ownership model. The incentives of a publically traded company are at odds with Devolver's anti-corporate branding as well, further hurting their position in the market. I generally agree with The Art Economist's thesis here, that indie game publishers cannot be public companies because their business model is inherently incompatible and they operate more like a VC firm. Unrelated: VC and Public markets alike are blights upon society and the ability to run a healthy business.

PortalRunner demonstrated a cool trick where [he embedded two video streams into one video on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UCBAqaT4SQc). When you control the playback environment this isn't actually that hard to do, but YouTube makes this rather difficult and fragile as you have no control over YouTube or the viewer's environment. There is also a good chance that the video will break sometime in the future so give it a watch while it still works. Basically he took advantage of the fact that Youtube plays back 1080p videos at 60 fps is you upload a 60 fps clip whereas low resolution downscales are rendered at 30 fps.

Lawrence [reminds people that Discord and Reddit are not a substitute for forums](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F2uywL_uezM). Discord is particularly awful for knowledge bases and Q/A stuff and anyone who argues that a chat room works for answering questions has either never used a forum or they are lying. Reddit is actively hostile to its users and information disappears on there very easily. While I'm not the biggest fan of Discourse, it is a decent forum software that makes it easy for people to run them. If you need to build a community around anything that involves more than casual discussions, forums are the way to go. Software projects that use Discord for tech support; you are making your and your user's lives significantly worse. I agree fully with Lawrence here about the value of forums if you could guess. 

The Hated One is [very critical of the reporting on GrapheneOS and Daniel Micay](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b6dsshMYj9c). If you don't know, GrapheneOS is probably the most secure phone operating system that currently exists. Unfortunately from everything I've seen Daniel Micay has no social awareness and can be very aggressive online. The Hated One argues that this should not be what people judge the project on and we should still use the project. He also calls people calling out Micay's behavior character assassination. I'm not going to tell you what software to use, but I do think Micay's behavior online should give people pause when using GrapheneOS. Not discrediting the project or Micay's contribution to society, but there is a danger to becoming dependent of software that is run by someone who is known to go off the rails. As for Wired's reporting on GrapheneOS; they did do the project and Micay dirty, and we should never tolerate for profit media spinning stories to get clicks and harm privacy. Micay's behavior rubbed me the wrong way, but that doesn't mean you shouldn't use GrapheneOS. I ended up going somewhere different, but still give the software a look if you need something secure, but still need android apps.

CARpg TCG talks about [the current state of KeyForge, a trading card game that Richard Garfield, creator of Magic the Gathering, made](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_mVyQ2xZLP0). I didn't get into KeyForge and when I was about to I thought the game died out, but it seems to be alive and kicking. KeyForge is different from many TCGs in that there is no deck building. Instead of constructing a deck, you play with a pre-constructed randomly generated deck. This makes the game a lot more casual and luck based, but also much easier to get into. It looks like the perfect type of game to play with my partner who won't get into MTG, though MTG is imploding right now so I haven't really played that in a while either. 

Ariel from Hazariel Atelier made some [new plates for light switches and power plugs around her home](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W9X5JQNlg6s). This is a project that really sparks joy. Modern fixtures are very utilitarian in most places around the world as any form of individuality harms resell value, fortunately they are fairly easy to switch out. Been thinking about this at my apartment for a long time, but never have. Ariel's video is full of ideas that might inspire you to add a little character to your home. 

Paul Stout talks about [what makes a high quality walk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vjn3CaKci5M) based on Jeff Speck's General Theory of Walkability. It is a short video that states the obvious to any urbanist, but still a great watch. 

Janus Cycle used [a peltier device and a candle to power an original Game Boy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6rUYV4R4BjI). The peltier effect is usually used to provide very moderate cooling or heating in cheap devices like budget dehumidifiers (that don't work) and drink coolers. It is not energy efficient and usually a novelty at best, but Janus has found a wonderful use case for cheap peltier devices. This is a really fun project.   

Jankbu [made a Cyberdeck](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gIWp_F9PPzI). I know I share a lot of these kinds of videos, but cyberdecks are awesome projects. This cyberdeck is an actual tool Jankbu plans to use for their daily work. I love that he used standard NPF batteries to power the thing and went the trackball route. He demonstrates the power of Cardboard-Aided Design (CAD) before jumping into Computer-Aided Design (CAD) and has a great presentation style. Give this one a watch. He even shared the project on his Github.

ChromaLock [built a pipe organ out of cheap recorders](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YLttcDYQr2Q). This is a fun project and probably the first time cheap recorders have ever been "useful" for something. Give it a watch. By the way, I did try learning how to play a concert alto recorder, but never got very good at it.

## See You Next Month

June is going to be a busy month. Going to go on a trip with my family for a couple of days, have more small projects to work on, and work has been busy and shows no signs of slowing down. 

NixOS Unstable hasn't compiled in the last month whenever I updated my flake so I switched to the stable branch. We will see how that goes before I try something like Fedora. 

I hope you are safe and having fun wherever you are in the world. Feel free to email me if you have any comments, want to talk, or have cool links to share.

