---
title: "November 2025 Review"
date: 2025-12-02T09:20:59Z
authors: 
- "Matthew Lamont"
draft: false
tags:
  - Monthly Favorites
  - Monthly Review
slug: /november-review/
keywords:
  - Review
description: A lot has happened this month. Lets go over what has been going on in my world and share some fun links. 
---

This was a crazy month, in a good way this time. I have a lot of photos to share that still need to be edited, but I went out of state for the first time in years. 

My employer does not have PTO rollover so at the end of the year employees lose any unused Paid Time Off hours. Yes this is anti-worker, but it is a common practice in the US. In any case, due to that I needed to use as much as possible in the short time left this year and ended up taking the first 4 days of November off as well as the 28th. This left me with more free time than average to do a lot of fun stuff.

## Descanso Gardens

My partner and I went to the beautiful [Descanso Gardens](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Descanso_Gardens) in La Canada Flintridge, CA. It is a 150-acre botanical garden here in LA. One thing people don't often realize is that there are large pockets of green space out here if you know where to look. So many beautiful plants and animals.

I took far too many photos so it will be a while before I upload them, but please hold me accountable and ask me where the photos are if you don't see me upload them soon.

We also ate at the restaurant on site. Very expensive, but everything they serve was made with local ingredients and tasted very good.

That week we also went to: Little Tokyo, our go-to date spot; Sawtelle Japantown, the multi-lane stroad from the train station did not have a sidewalk and it was raining so we will not be doing this again, but we made the most of it; and The Grove, an out door shopping mall that is far above our economic class made to look like a pedestrianized European city street. It was a busy week full of adventure.

## Los Angeles Museum of Love

The [LA Museum of Love](https://www.losangelesmuseumoflove.com) is a fun attraction just by the LA City College. It is not a museum as much as it is a collection of fun activities for couples. My girlfriend and went in the middle of the month on a Staurday. We really enjoyed it. It is full of often silly, but well-thought-out activities ranging from drawing a picture together to being hooked up to a heart rate monitor and starring into each others' eyes till your heart beats match.

## Trip to Arizona

It has been a long time since I left my home state of California, but one of my best friends moved out to Arizona a while back and invited another of our best friends and I to his place for the Thanksgiving weekend. The mad man drove all the way out to LA to pick us up on the 27th and dropped us back off in LA on the 30th. For those of you who don't know how big the United States is, it was a 6 hour drive there and about 8 back (due to holiday traffic). The states might be right next to each other, but it is a vast distance. We had a packed weekend though and our Arizonan friend really wanted to show us around.

On Friday we went to [Chiricahua National Monument](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chiricahua_National_Monument), a beautiful national park about a 3 hour drive from my friend's home where we were staying (yes, even the state of AZ is vast). We went on one of the shorter trails, but ended up going a little further than we were supposed to (we were in there for at least an hour longer than we planned), throwing off our schedule for the rest of the day. The rock formations are amazing, not seen anything quite like it anywhere else. It is also extremely remote. If you can stomach a long drive it is worth seeing in person.

After Chiricahua we went to the town of [Tombstone](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tombstone%2C_Arizona). It was already dark by the time we arrived and took about an hour to get there. It is a lovely town with a large and well-preserved western strip, making it a perfect tourist trap. We sadly did not see the worlds larges rose bush, but we did get some amazing fudge before we decided to take the long track back to Phoenix.

Saturday was a stay close day. We went to [Tortilla Flat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tortilla_Flat%2C_Arizona) and took a leisurely drive through the [Superstition mountains](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superstition_Mountains). After that we hungout around my friend's home for a bit and then saw something that has been on my bucket list for a long while, a Wurlitzer Theater Organ. Turns out there is a pizza place named [Organ Stop Pizza](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Organ_Stop_Pizza) and they just so happen to have the largest Wurlitzer. The pizza was just okay, but the fact that there is a giant, building sized, organ at a random pizza place in Phoenix is trully wild and not something I expected. 

Sunday was the day to get back to LA. We stopped by the [Riparian Preserve at Water Ranch](https://www.gilbertaz.gov/departments/parks-and-recreation/riparian-preserve-at-water-ranch) early in the morning. It is a large artificial wetland using reclaimed water. There were a lot of birds hanging around so I ended up taking a lot of photos. After that it was about 8 hours of driving with a couple stops along the way to get gas or stretch our legs. A lot of traffic going from AZ to CA and that means car crashes and general traffic. Nevertheless, I got some fun photos of the sunset. 

This trip was also the first time I had food from Waffle House, not amazing food and overpriced, but it is passably better than the majority of other diner chains. We had to take my friend who never been to a diner to another one that was a lot better so he could experience a core aspect of 'american' food culture properly. 

After all that adventure I'm going to take December to decompress.

## Links:

### News

Some US states [are expanding their censorship laws by banning VPNs](https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2025/11/lawmakers-want-ban-vpns-and-they-have-no-idea-what-theyre-doing). While public VPNs are not a tool for true privacy like they claim, they are tools that can help aid in being private online, get around censorship, protect lives, help students go to school, and employees work remotely. This paired with age verification laws are terrible steps towards making the internet a less safe place. Keeping children safe doesn't mean we need to compromise freedom of speech, risk people's lives (journalists need VPNs), and encourage people to use less safe methods to get around censorship. If there was a true desire to help kids they would invest in education and fight things that actually cause harm. Anyone who argues in favor of age verification and VPN bans is at best maliciously ignorant of what they are doing and it is far more likely that they are aware of the damage they are doing. 

### Cool Projects

The [Pinouts Book](https://pinouts.org) by NODE and Baptiste is an amazing collection of pinout references for many components that electronics tinkerers and makers uses. It is high quality, includes links to official documentation, and was designed to be printable on home printers. NODE also has an [announcement video on their YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EI5PkqR0sjE). 

NODE is on a roll this month, they updated their [Build List](https://buildlist.org) website. This is a website that contains links to manufacturers offering everything from 3D Printing to Book Printing. It lists what services they offer, minimum order amounts, and setup costs for each manufacturer. It is sorted by service, region, and country so you can easily find the closest fab to your location. While it is nice to be able to do things like 3D printing at home, I don't know any people who have a printing press or the equipment to make multilayered PCBs at home. This list will hopefully help you in your future projects and is just another great example of the manufacturing revolution. 

### Articles

Ruben has a delightful page about [Lotus Organizer](http://retro.rubenerd.com/org.htm) on his Retro Corner. I've never used Lotus, but I love PIM and PKM software as a whole. I use a little bit of KDE's Kontact suit as well as Thunderbird, though both have fallen to the wayside in favor of good old paper and pen. Digital tools are great if they work for you and are flexible/customizable enough to fit your needs. I hate Outlook and wish my work used almost anything else. If Lotus integrated with KDE like Kontact does, I'd be inclined to use it for my contacts. Sadly nothing really integrates with KDE as well as KDE software. 

On a more serious note, Ruben also talks about how [sad Mozilla's AI focused Firefox mantra is](https://rubenerd.com/mozillas-latest-quagmire/). Many gen-AI features are antithetical to a healthy web. Mozilla must know this, but over the last few years they have continued to alienate their users in an effort to be like Chrome. If their users wanted Chrome they would use it. They wanted the customizable Firefox that respected them as users and gave them agency. AI does the opposite and the fact that it is opt-out instead of opt-in is very telling that Mozilla doesn't respect their users nor their agency to choose for themselves. Vivaldi has a lot going against it, the UI is closed source, it is chromium based, and it is slow, but it respects its users and doesn't use AI. I really want to use Firefox on principle, but there is no way I could recommend it over software that respects users. 

Jim Nielsen posted an observation about [AI vs Human mental models](https://blog.jim-nielsen.com/2025/more-context-bro/). He mentions how prompting AI often involves adding more information to a prompt/series of prompts to hopefully nudge the AI into guessing the correct solution for your problem. When humans try to create things efficiently, we often take subtractive approach rather than an additive one, sometimes this leads us to eliminating the problem we wanted to solve in the first place. This kind of thinking expands outside just AI. He mentions NPM dependencies, but I think all human effort focused on quick fixes and quick money fails into this trap. Look at big tech, it is all focused on expanding in some way (increase your productivity, grow the platform, sell more, etc.) rather than sustainable and simple solutions to problems. This kind of thinking creates more complex products while also abstracting any way for us to understand what is happening under the hood. I'm a maximalist and love having every tool for every job, but even I know better than to carry the kitchen sink with me. The capitalist brained tech like generative AI can't ever not be like this because it was built by people who think endless abstraction and growth are the answer. His other post about [AI being pushed into browsers](https://blog.jim-nielsen.com/2025/rip-browsers/), stripping away intentionality and the 'browsing' aspect of the internet kinda reflects my point; AI bros don't understand human thinking, creativity, or really much of anything. 

Speaking of AI browser, Cory Dransfeldt reminds us that they are [inherently headed towards enshittification and may already be harming web accessibility by misusing web standards](https://www.coryd.dev/posts/2025/ai-browsers-are-straight-out-of-the-enshittification-playbook). 

Veronica Explains [how/why she doesn't pay for streaming services anymore](https://vkc.sh/responding-to-comments-on-i-stream-nothing/) (Link to an article that links to her YouTube video) as well as [how she uses Handbrake to transcode her media](https://vkc.sh/handbrake-2025/). With how the world is going, I agree with her on this. Physical media and DRM free digital media are the way to go. It is often cheaper (physical media that is), you actually own it as much as is possible in the modern world, and it gives you a lot of control. A lot of my media is ripped from DVDs and Bluerays, bought from DRM free websites (GOG), or has had the DRM broken. While I have a complex view of piracy, I do download media that is impossible to own (out of print, fan translated, only available via abusive DRM/streaming sites). My switch console is physical only save a few local multiplayer games (I've started backing up those games to my server). A major part of having everything saved to my own systems or being physical is that I have complete control over my consumption. No algorithm is telling me what to watch (thankfully I have friends and good old internet searches to tell me) and my bookshelf is a constant reminder of how many unplayed games and unread books I have so it is less tempting to overconsume. Maybe I should write my own article about this, but Veronica's video and articles really give a good overview of why and how to do it.

Scott shared a short post about [how crazy it is that we have so many inputs due to social media](https://rscottjones.com/the-folly-of-social-media-feeds/) that I want to piggyback on. It truly can be crazy even without social media. Fortunately there are tools like RSS that help a lot. You can filter your inputs and have control without an algorithm choosing for you and you can pick what you want to read/focus on at a given time. You even have the all mighty "Mark All as Read" button to clear out your feeds when they become too great. Our brains were not built for social media and social media was built to exploit that fact. It makes us miserable, builds echo chambers, and creates an environment that is constantly switching context. This goes back to Veronica's reasons for not using streaming, a major one being control over inputs. You will be happier for it.  

Joel asked us to [imagine if everyone read in public instead of just scrolling social media and brain rot on our phones](https://joelchrono.xyz/blog/if-everyone-read-everywhere/). As one of the lucky folks who doesn't use much in the way of social media (Discord for chatting with friends, lurking on the 32Bit Café and RPG Maker Web forms, and watches videos on YouTube) and who basically doesn't even use the internet outside the house anymore, I can safely say books are my best friend when out and about alone. Many good conversations with strangers started over books and it is much more mentally stimulating than waiting for the next message or passively scrolling through the latest in a series of depressing news articles. If everyone read the world would be a better place, if everyone read in public I bet we would open up a lot more doors. This might seem contradictory to people who think of reading as a purely solitary activity, but people who love the stories they read and techniques they learn from books are often more than happy to discuss the books and the things they gained from them. I'll admit that sometimes I don't want to talk to someone about what I'm reading, but a polite dismissal has rarely failed to get my personal space back. Pick up a book from your local library or your bookshelf if you have some lying around and give them a read. 

Kev asks people [what they think happens after they die as well as shares his take](https://kevquirk.com/blog/what-happens-after-we-die/). He is an atheist and thinks nothing spiritually, just an absence of consciousness and the body decays and becomes something else. There is a kind of beauty in that, something younger me would not have been able to see. For myself, I'm Christian as far as that I believe in God and generally the teachings of Jesus as presented by his disciples. They don't actually talk much about what the afterlife is actually like other than that it is paradise for those who accept salvation and damnation and eventually nothingness for those who reject it. I would love to be wrong about the negative side of that, but I won't go too much into theology today. Humans don't have a perfect understanding of anything and religious beliefs are often complex and contradictory. I like to keep it simple when explaining things to others. As much as I love theology as a whole and am no theologian or religious scholar so my own understanding is limited. Very basic belief is that we choose to live forever in a place that is ideal (though I doubt a human could figure out what is actually ideal for them) or choose not to for whatever reason and eventually not exist. I do not subscribe to the idea that God is a spiteful being who wants others to suffer and take a nuanced approach to the religious teachings in the bible. That means understanding the culture at the time the books were written and the historical ideals that influenced that culture. The understanding of the afterlife is very much something influenced by the cultures at the time and our current culture now. It is not something that can be fully explained in a short paragraph or even a full essay by someone like me who mostly just enjoys occasional bouts of theology.

Brit [summarized his gripes with gen-AI very well](https://blog.kingcons.io/posts/ill-omens.html). I've already said what I have to say about AI, so I'll just let Brit's article speak for itself, his feelings are very relatable. 

### Videos

Fraser Builds has [started a series on the history of Alchemy and its transformation into modern chemistry](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7XRxGCqpmVc). He is recreating experiments from primary texts and gives a lot of historical context. I've mentioned his channel in the past, but if you haven't already and are interested in the history of natural philosophy, alchemy, or anything related you must give his videos a watch. Also he is the only one on youtube who seems to have built an alchemy lab from an academic standpoint, that should be worth a watch alone. 

Attoparsec, the guy who made that 1000 key keyboard I shared March, [turned a Vtech Talking Scholar toy into a cyberdeck](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XewX68F0JDg). It even uses the punch cards from the toy to load up programs. It is really cool seeing what people can do with old tech that was destined for landfills otherwise. Raspberry Pi, Arduino, and the other tech that has spawned thanks to their accessibility has not only helped create a maker revolution, but has breathed new life into so much ewaste. It is amazing. The project is really cool and makes me want a cyberdeck myself.

Mitxela made a [fluid simulation pendant](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jis1MC5Tm8k). A little LED matrix display powered by a microcontroller running a FLIP fluid simulation housed in a gold-plated pendant. What an awesome multidisciplinary project. Judging by the viewer count on this video, most people who are interested in this have likely seen it, but this was too cool to not share. He has a [whole write-up on his website](https://mitxela.com/projects/fluid-pendant) as well. 

Polymatt [restored a Chaplet Halikan LA-30A Laptop](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BilLgXkR_Kw). Another example of the home manufacturing revolution and skilled people saving things from the landfill. This one was done for [LGR](https://www.youtube.com/@LGR/videos), another awesome YouTube channel and one you probably already know about. The skill and attention to detail Polymatt has is truly beyond amazing. Give this video a watch.

The 5439 Workshop [built a coffee table with a model solar system in it](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x3iUpv1Wclw). The solar system has planets all following their own orbit and a sun that explodes and then contracts after a period of time. People keep making exceptionally cool coffee tables.

Ray Delahanty from CityNerd [gives a tour of central Portland, OR](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ARTLXxPI2X0) and discusses the urban development of the area. This is the same Portland that is supposedly on fire and being destroyed by the mythical antifa organization if you believe Fox News or Trump. As you can see in the video, it is just another US city trying to undo decades of bad urban policy and make life better for those who live there. No fire, no mobs storming ICE facilities (just a few peaceful protesters dressed up in costumes), and no bullets flying left and right. Granted, Ray is showing us his biased view of the city, but his vision is much more realistic to what even a basic search on the internet will pull up. No American city is in such a bad state that it needs the military called in.

<!-- Moony from Moon Channel goes over [the overlap between fans of the anime K-On (and media like it) and poorly adjusted alt-right men](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jDneagagd5s). For those of you who don't know, K-On is an anime about a group of girls who form a high school band. The girls do a lot of other activities and neglect their band duties in most episodes. The show if fluffy and innocent most of the time (with some of the usual anime fanservice that leaves possible deniability). Moony argues that most importantly, it is safe. It is a place for an incel to avoid the troubles of being grown up. This is why you will see people on social media say outright racist and sexist things while also shouting praises for a show that is arguably about growing up and empowerment. I would be the first to praise K-On as it is an anime that I enjoyed when young and slice-of-life anime still have a place in my heart, but you need more media literacy skills and more maturity than the average alt-right incel has to get something positive out of it. Slice-of-life anime, especially of the cute girls do cute things variety, have always been, at least in part, about exploiting loneliness, overwhelm with life, and alienation. This isn't necessarily because the shows are bad or that all viewers will take the wrong message from them and never grow up, but that capitalism by its very nature is alienating. That alienation is something that sells comfortable media to twelve-year-old boys in adult bodies. Something that Moony didn't mention is that in the end of K-On the characters are forced to move on and grow up, I think all the incels forgot about that part too. Moony does end his video on a positive note about embracing cringe and having a more mature understanding of the things you love. There is nothing wrong with liking K-On, My Little Pony, or any other media. The problem is using it as an escape from having to grow up and leave the alienated state that capitalism tries to keep us trapped in. Anyway, there is a lot of stuff to unpack in the video and it is worth a watch if you want to understand why alt-right people gravitate towards innocence, lack of conflict, and acting like 12-year-olds.  -->

Benn Jordan is back with another great video. This time about those [invasive Flock cameras that popped up everywhere in the US and what we can do about them](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uB0gr7Fh6lY). The cameras are insecure android devices running old versions of android, leak data that can be captured with the right radio equipment, and the marketing behind them is full of outright lies. I've started to see a few of them out here myself. Surveillance is already bad enough without letting unaudited private companies place cameras everywhere. This isn't just limited to Flock, there are other companies doing similar things. There is also [this nifty little map of flock cameras](https://deflock.me/map) if you are interested. Remember, these cameras are being used by the police state to harass and imprison innocent people.

Perseus Grim talks about [the medieval stasis often found in fantasy stories](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lq7U2CIO81E&t=532s). It is common for fantasy stories to be set in a vaguely European medieval setting, something that people love to complain about. Perseus Grim gives an argument from both an in story reason and reason why the author would write the story set in a setting like this. He acknowledges that most fantasy settings should move forward technologically, but in high magic worlds, worlds with active gods, etc. there might be a good reason society gets stuck in this era of development. There is a lot of good stuff here. Highly recommend watching this video.

## To Another Month

Hopefully December will be a calmer month. I do plan to visit family, but other than that I'm going to get plenty of 'me' time. It was truly a lovely month with all the adventure, almost enough to forget the stressers of the world. 

There is a lot to do at home and I'm sure you have more articles to read on your web browsing journey so I'll end this here.
